Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

LAW OF CRIMES 

COURSE OBJECTIVES: 

This  course  is  designed  to  understand  the  meaning  of  crime  and  the  essential  principles  of 

criminal liability by a study of a range of offences under the Indian Penal Code 1860. It further aims to 

empower students to understand the fundamentals of criminal jurisprudence and analyze the various 

elements  of  the  crime.  The  students  will  be  equipped  to  understand  the  principles  of  culpability  and 

punishment. The students will be well versed with the general scheme of the Indian Penal Code 1860 

and  be  able  to  grasp  the  various  terms  and  terminology  used  in  the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860.  The 

students  will  be  prepared  to  analyze  the  ingredients  of  various  offences  and  study  the  punishments 

prescribed  thereto.  They  will  be  able  to  identify  the  general  exceptions  under  the  penal  law  and 

understand the principles of joint criminal liability. 

इस पा(cid:6)य(cid:8)म को भारतीय दंड संिहता 1860  के तहत अपराधॲ की एक (cid:26)ृंखला के अ(cid:30)ययन  ारा अपराध के अथ" और 
के तहत अपराधॲ की एक (cid:26)ृंखला के अ(cid:30)ययन  ारा अपराध के अथ" और 
इस पा(cid:6)य(cid:8)म को भारतीय दंड संिहता 
के तहत अपराधॲ की एक (cid:26)ृंखला के अ(cid:30)ययन  ारा अपराध के अथ" और 
के तहत अपराधॲ की एक (cid:26)ृंखला के अ(cid:30)ययन  ारा अपराध के अथ" और 
इस पा(cid:6)य(cid:8)म को भारतीय दंड संिहता 
इस पा(cid:6)य(cid:8)म को भारतीय दंड संिहता 

आपरािधक दािय%व के आव'यक िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए िडज़ाइन िकया गया है। इसका उ0े'य छा2ॲ को आपरािधक 
आपरािधक दािय%व के आव'यक िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए िडज़ाइन िकया गया है। इसका उ0े'य छा2ॲ को आपरािधक 
आपरािधक दािय%व के आव'यक िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए िडज़ाइन िकया गया है। इसका उ0े'य छा2ॲ को आपरािधक 
आपरािधक दािय%व के आव'यक िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए िडज़ाइन िकया गया है। इसका उ0े'य छा2ॲ को आपरािधक 

िलए  सश:त  बनाना  है।  अपराध  का 
7  त%वॲ  का  िव'लेषण  करने  के     िलए  सश:त  बनाना  है।  अपराध  का
3यायशा52  के  मूल  िस()तॲ  को  समझने  और  िविभ7  त%वॲ  का  िव'लेषण  करने  के
3यायशा52  के  मूल  िस()तॲ  को  समझने  और  िविभ
िलए  सश:त  बनाना  है।  अपराध  का
िलए  सश:त  बनाना  है।  अपराध  का
7  त%वॲ  का  िव'लेषण  करने  के
7  त%वॲ  का  िव'लेषण  करने  के
3यायशा52  के  मूल  िस()तॲ  को  समझने  और  िविभ
3यायशा52  के  मूल  िस()तॲ  को  समझने  और  िविभ

छा2ॲ को अपराधीता और दंड के िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए सुसि=जत िकया जाएगा। छा2 भारतीय दंड संिहता 1860 
छा2ॲ को अपराधीता और दंड के िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए सुसि=जत िकया जाएगा। छा2 भारतीय दंड संिहता 
छा2ॲ को अपराधीता और दंड के िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए सुसि=जत िकया जाएगा। छा2 भारतीय दंड संिहता 
छा2ॲ को अपराधीता और दंड के िस()तॲ को समझने के िलए सुसि=जत िकया जाएगा। छा2 भारतीय दंड संिहता 

की सामा3य योजना से अ?छी तरह वािकफ हॲगे और भारतीय दंड संिहता 1860  मA Bयु:त िविभ7
शतCं और शDदावली को 
मA Bयु:त िविभ7    शतCं और शDदावली को 
की सामा3य योजना से अ?छी तरह वािकफ हॲगे और भारतीय दंड संिहता 
शतCं और शDदावली को 
शतCं और शDदावली को 
मA Bयु:त िविभ7
मA Bयु:त िविभ7
की सामा3य योजना से अ?छी तरह वािकफ हॲगे और भारतीय दंड संिहता 
की सामा3य योजना से अ?छी तरह वािकफ हॲगे और भारतीय दंड संिहता 

समझने मA सEम हॲगे। छा2ॲ को िविभ7 अपराधॲ की सामFी का िव'लेषण करने और दंड का अ(cid:30)ययन करने के िलए 
समझने मA सEम हॲगे। छा2ॲ को िविभ7 अपराधॲ की सामFी का िव'लेषण करने और दंड का अ(cid:30)ययन करने के िलए 
समझने मA सEम हॲगे। छा2ॲ को िविभ7 अपराधॲ की सामFी का िव'लेषण करने और दंड का अ(cid:30)ययन करने के िलए 
समझने मA सEम हॲगे। छा2ॲ को िविभ7 अपराधॲ की सामFी का िव'लेषण करने और दंड का अ(cid:30)ययन करने के िलए 

वे  दंड  कानून  के  तहत  सामा3य  अपवादॲ  की  पहचान  करने  और  संयु:त 
िकया  जाएगा।  इसके  िलए  िनधGिरत     वे  दंड  कानून  के  तहत  सामा3य  अपवादॲ  की  पहचान  करने  और  संयु:त 
तैयारतैयारतैयारतैयार     िकया  जाएगा।  इसके  िलए  िनधGिरत
वे  दंड  कानून  के  तहत  सामा3य  अपवादॲ  की  पहचान  करने  और  संयु:त 
वे  दंड  कानून  के  तहत  सामा3य  अपवादॲ  की  पहचान  करने  और  संयु:त 
िकया  जाएगा।  इसके  िलए  िनधGिरत
िकया  जाएगा।  इसके  िलए  िनधGिरत

को समझने मA सEम हॲगे। 
आपरािधक दािय%व के िस()तॲ    को समझने मA सEम हॲगे।
आपरािधक दािय%व के िस()तॲ
को समझने मA सEम हॲगे।
को समझने मA सEम हॲगे।
आपरािधक दािय%व के िस()तॲ
आपरािधक दािय%व के िस()तॲ

COURSE OUTCOMES: 
After completing this course, the student will be able to: 

1.  Identify the various components of criminal culpability and an offence. 
2.  Appreciate the fundamentals of Criminal Jurisprudence. 
3.  Appreciate the fundamentals of culpability and the various kinds of punishment. 
4.  Understand criminal terms and terminology as per the Indian Penal Code. 
5.  Understand the extent and operation (jurisdiction) of the Indian Penal Code. 
6.  Identify various crimes from the point of view of the requirements of substantive criminal law. 
7.  Identify the punishment prescribed for various offences from a micro perspective as per IPC. 
8.  Appreciate and understand the aspects of joint criminal liability. 
9.  Identify whether a given case is covered under any of the general exceptions. 

Page 1 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

MODULE 1: 
1.1 History of Criminal law 
Difference between civil and criminal law 
1.2 Concept of Crime, Components of Crime and Criminal Liability 
1.3 Theories and Kinds of Punishment 
(Includes IPC Chapter III: Sections 53 to 75) 
1.4 Capital Punishment 
1.5 Stages of Crime 
1.6 Theories of Negligence 
1.7 Introduction to Cyber Crimes 

1.1 History of Criminal law 

Like  in  each  edified  society,  in  India  as  well, a  criminal  equity  framework  developed.  Financial 
and political conditions winning during various periods of the historical backdrop of India impacted its 
advancement.  In  like  manner,  the  targets  of  the  criminal  equity  and  techniques  for  its  organization 
changed  every  once  in  a  while  and  starting  with  one  time  of  history  then  onto  the  next.  To  suit  the 
changing  conditions  the  rulers  acquainted  new  strategies  and  procedures  with  implement  law  and 
control equity.  

The  Indian  Criminal  Justice  System  as  we  know  today  isn’t  a  modern  development.  It  finds  its 
origin  from  ancient  times.  There  exited  unique  methods  to  deal  with  the  criminals,  with  each  state 
having its own different and unique mode of punishment and justice. The Judicial framework manages 
the organization of the laws through the organization of the courts. The framework gives the apparatus 
to the settling of the questions because of which the wronged Party moves toward the courts. Nothing 
annoys in the human heart more than an agonizing feeling of bad form. No general public can permit a 
circumstance to develop where the impression prevails of there being no change for complaints. 

The  Criminal  Justice  System  alludes  to  the  organizations  of  the  government  accused  of 
implementing  the  law,  mediating  wrongdoing,  and  rectifying  criminal  lead.  The  criminal  equity 
framework is an instrument of social control which includes that the society considers a few practices 
so risky and damaging that it either carefully controls their event or bandits them by and large. It is the 
activity of the organizations of equity to forestall these practices by securing and rebuffing offenders or 
deflecting their future events. 

The  criminal  equity  framework  is  lumbering,  costly,  and  aggregately  lamentable.  The  poor  can 
never arrive at the sanctuary of equity due to substantial costs engaged with obtaining entrance and the 
persona  of  lawful  ethos.  The  order  of  courts,  with  a  great  many  interests,  puts  lawful  equity  past  the 
range  of  poor  people.  Making  the  legitimate  cycle  costlier  is  an  aberrant  disavowal  of  equity  to  the 
individuals and this hit hard on the refuse of the world in the public arena. The lawful framework has 
lost its believability for the more fragile segment of the network. 

The judicial system in ancient India 
Justice S. S. Dhavan said “India has the world’s oldest judiciary. No other judicial structure has a 
more ancient and exalted pedigree”. 

The  administration  of  justice  was  not  a  part  of  the  state’s  responsibilities  in  the  early  days.  In 
Vedic literature, we do not see references to any judicial organization. The aggrieved party used to sit 
before  the  accused  house  in  order  to  get  its  false  relief  and  not  travel  until  his  (aggrieved  party) 
arguments  were  resolved.  The  tribe  and  clan  assemblies  performed  subsequent  justice  and  the  legal 
process  was  thus  very  clear.  But  the  king  eventually  came  to  be  called  the  root  of  justice  with  the 
expansion of the duties of the state and also the development of the royal powers, and a more or less 
complex  system  of  judicial  administration  came  into  being.  Knowledge  regarding  the  well-developed 
judiciary is given to us by the Dharma Shastra’s, Niti Shastras and even the Arthashastra. The King is the 

Page 2 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

head of the fountain of justice, according to this literature, and he was expected to spend a few hours 
per day in adjudication. 

The  primary  responsibility  of  the  king  is  the  protection  of  his  subjects,  which  entails  the 
prosecution  of  the  wrongdoer.  In  several  ruling  dynasties  of  ancient  India,  judicial  structures  for  civil 
and criminal cases were essential features. The definition of sin was the norm by which crime was to be 
established,  while  civil  wrongs  applied  largely  to  conflicts  occurring  over  money.  The  Manusmrti  or 
“Laws of Manu,” Sanskrit Manusm-ti, also known as Mānava-dharmaśāstra, is the most significant and 
earliest metrical work written by the ancient sage Manu of Hinduism’s Dharmaśāstra textual tradition, 
which  prescribes  ten  essential  rules  for  Dharma  observance:  patience  (dhriti),  forgiveness  (kshama), 
piety or self-control (dama), integrity (asteya), sanctity (asteya) (krodha). (krodha). (krodha). (krodha). 
“Nonviolence,  truth,  non-coveting,  purity  of  body  and  mind,  control  of  senses  are  the  essence  of 
Dharma,”  Manu  further  writes.  Consequently,  not  only  the  person  but  all  in  society  are  regulated  by 
dharmic rules. 

Grounds of Litigation and different kinds of Law 
Grounds for lawsuits and various forms of law: 
These eighteen ‘Titles of Law’ or ‘Grounds for Lawsuits’ given by Manu refer to the  reasons on which 
litigation may also be brought “(1) Non-payment of debts; (2) deposits; (3) selling without ownership; 
(4)  partnership;  (5)  non-payment  of  gifts;  (6)  non-payment  of  salaries;  (7)  violation  of  contract;  (8) 
termination of purchase or purchase; (9) disputes between herdsmen and owners; (10) non-payment of 
salaries; boundary dispute law; (11) verbal assault; (12) physical assault; (13) theft; (14) violence; (15) 
sexual crimes against herdsmen; (10) non-payment of salaries”. 

• Different  kinds  of  laws:  In  compliance  with  rules  which  fall  under  one  or  another  of  the 

following four heads, justice was administered, namely: 

• Sacred law (Dharma) 
• Secular Law (Vyavahara) 
• Custom and (Chaitra) 
• Royal  

Types of Court in Ancient India 

Ancient  India  has  the  highest  quality  of  any  ancient  nation  in  terms  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
judiciary, learning, honesty, impartiality, and equality, and these expectations have not been surpassed 
until  today;  that  the  Indian  judiciary  consisted  of  a  hierarchy  of  judges  with  the  Court  of  the  Chief 
Justice  (Praadvivaka)  at  the  top,  granting  each  higher  court  the  right  to  review  it,  That  the  accused 
could not be punished in criminal trials unless his guilt was proven consistent with law; that the trial 
consisted of 4 stages in civil cases such as several modern trials, complaint, reply, hearing and decree; 
that Indian jurisprudence was familiar with  doctrines such as res adjudicata (prangn yaya); that each 
one  trials,  civil  jurisprudence  That  the  decrees  of  all  courts  except  the  King  be  open  to  challenge  or 
revision  consistent  with  fixed  principles;  that  the  central  obligation  of  the  Court  was  to  strive  to  do 
justice  “without  favor  or  fear,”  was  heard  by  a  bench  of  several  judges  and  barely  by  a  judge  sitting 
alone. 
The courts, as given by Kat’yayana Smrithi, are divided into six according to their hierarchy. 

1.  Kula  (Family  council) –  The  Mitakshara  has  described  the  Kula  as  consisting  of  a  group  of 
relations, relative or distant. In ancient India, the Kula, or joint families, were often very large. 
The  elders  used  to  try  to  resolve  it  whenever  there  was  a  disagreement  between  two 
members. This informal body of family elders was called Kula. 

2.  Shreni (Council of trade or profession) – The matter was brought to Shreni court when the 
attempt  at  family  arbitration  failed.  The  word  Shreni,  was  used  to  describe  the  guild  courts 
that were a prominent feature of ancient India’s commercial life from 500 B.C. Sreni had four 
or five members of their own executive committees and it is possible that they may also have 
served  as  the  Sreni  court  to  resolve  the  disputes  between  their  members.  This  was  an 
Page 3 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

assembly of people including betel sellers, weavers, shoe makers, etc. who followed a specific 
occupation. 

3.  Gana (Assembly of village) – This was a large assembly of elders in the village or grama who 

are accepted by the people of the area as learned, impartial and having integrity. 

4.  Adhikrita (Court appointed by the King) – These are the courts authorized by the King for 
delivering  the  justice  in  which  persons  who  are  well  versed  in  the  Sutras  and  Smrithis  are 
appointed  as  judges.  These  kinds  of  courts  were  of  varied  types  as  consistent  with  their 
jurisdiction.  they’re  (I)  Pratishtitha  which  was  established  at  a  specific  village  or  town.  (ii) 
Apratishtitha  was  a  mobile  court  which  would  assemble  during  a  particular  place  to 
undertake  a  selected  case  as  called  upon  by  the  King.  (iii)  Mudrita  was  the  next  level  court 
which was authorized to use the royal seal. 

5.  Sasita (Kings Court) – It was the highest court of law in the Kingdom. It was presided over by 
the  King  himself.  There  was  a  chief  Justice  called  Pradvivaka  and  a  group  of  Judges  called 
Sabhyas to aid and assist the King. 

6.   Nripa (King himself) – The King was the Supreme authority in the adjudication legal process 

and he was guided by the principles of Dharma, which he could not override. 

Courts and their Jurisdiction 

Kula, Shreni and Gana could  trial  all  the  civil  and  criminal  disputes  except  for  an  offence  of 
violence (Sahasa). The cases involving violence are to be tried by the Adhikrita a court appointed by the 
King. Corporal punishments are to be decided by the Sasita (Kings Court) but to be finalized by the King 
himself. A decision rendered by the Kula can be reviewed by the Shreni and a decision by Shreni can be 
reviewed  by  the Gana.  Likewise,  the  decision  of  a Gana can  be  reviewed  by  the Adhikrita courts.  The 
Law  Commission  in  its  Fourteenth  Report  had  said:  Ancient  authors  have  defined  the  hierarchy  of 
courts as having existed in the distant past, but later works by writers such as Narada, Brihaspathi and 
others  seem  to  suggest  that  normal  courts  may  have  existed  on  a  sizable  scale.  Thus  the  hierarchy  of 
courts was considered to have existed in ancient India with certain elements of authoritative ladder of 
review power over the courts below. 
Judicial Procedure 

In  ancient  times,  the  courts  operated  on  a  well-laid  procedural  framework.  If  anyone  has  been 
harmed  by  others,  he  may  file  a  Pratijna  (plaint)  with  the  court.  Plaintiff  was  the  vadin,  and  the 
defendant  was  prati  vadin.  Dharma  kosa  gives  the  evidence  of  the  plaintiff  that  it  should  be  un- 
ambiguous.  The  parties  can  produce  the  witness  and  in  the  absence  summons  to  the  witness  was 
ordered by the Judge. The presumption of evidence was cast on the person alleging the crime. Jayapatra 
contains  all the  documents  of  victory,  it  usually  contains  brief  statements  about  the plaintiff  and  they 
are  in  written  form  and  judges  should  not  be  biased  regarding  their  statements.  In  criminal  justice 
system, kings and his officers usually take cognizance on their own.  

The  Mahabharata  states  that  ‘punishment  preserves  Dharma,  Artha  and  Kama,’  and  is  well 
acknowledged  in  Sastras  Dhanda  Neeti.  The  judgment  should  be  delivered  in  a  way  that  guarantees 
confidence  and  trust  in  the  judiciary.  To  correct  the  wrong  doer,  a  deterrent  is  always  needed.  The 
penalties  were  categorized  as  (1)  Vagdanda-admonition;  (2)  Dhigdanda-censorship;  (3)  Dhanadanda-
fine; (4) Angaccheda – mutilation; (5) Vadhadanda – Death penalty. 

Importance of Jury 

If they are not followed by a jury of three, five or seven jurors called sabhyas, then the king and 
chief justice could not begin a court’s trial. It was expected that they were unbiased and fearless. A juror 
who remained quiet was condemned. And if it was in contrast to that of the king, they should voice their 
view.  A  variety  of  prominent  jurists  contend  that  the  king  or  judge  ought  to  be  directed  by  the  jury’s 
judgment, and the king exercised his right to settle the case according to his own opinion only when the 
jurors did not come to a definitive decision. 

Page 4 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

As  they  were  well  versed  in  Dharmashastras,  these  sabhyas  were  usually  Brahmins.  There’s  no  need, 
however, regarding knowledge of sacred law when the case (the party to the dispute) involved conflicts 
between farmers, merchants and forest dwellers. The authors of Dharmashastra themselves proposed 
that the cases be tried with the aid of the jurors chosen from the castes or the occupations of the parties 
themselves. Sukra refers to the practice of appointing recognized agents in the law courts to defend a 
case when a party was himself unable to do so owing to his preoccupation or ignorance of the law. Such 
agents  were  known  as  Niyogins  and  they  were  expected  to  guard  the  interests  of  their  parties  very 
carefully.  Their  fee  varied  from  six  to  half  percent,  according  to  the  value  of  the  property.  If  they 
colluded with the other party, they were punished by the state. 

The  sentences  in  vogue  were  fines,  incarceration,  banishment,  mutilation  and  death  penalty. 
Fines  were  the  most  widespread  and  punishment  also  varied  with  the  accused’s  race.  The  prison 
service  was  under  the  charge  of  an  official  named  Sannidhata,  and  Bandhanagaradhyaksha  was  the 
name of the jailor. In separate wards, male and female inmates were held. 

Administration of Justice during Vedic and Early Vedic Period 

Naman was believed to be the fountain of justice in ancient India as the lord of Dharma and was 
entrusted with the sole authority of the administration of justice and his primary responsibility was to 
protect  his  subject’s  rights.  The  King’s  Court  was  the  highest  court,  and  the  Chief  Justice’s  court  was 
next to it (Pradvivaka). There was, thus, a hierarchy of judges. Village councils (Kulani) deal with basic 
civil  and  criminal  disputes  in  villages.  The  courts  were  watched  over  at  a  higher  level  in  cities  and 
districts  by  government  officials  under  the  King’s  jurisdiction  to  execute  justice.  Trade  guilds  were 
permitted  to  exert  effective  authority  over  their  members  in  order  to  deal  with  problems  between 
members of the craft community, merchants, etc. There were also existing family courts. Civil disputes 
among family members were resolved by Puga assemblies organized by groups of families in the same 
village. Minor criminal offences were dealt with in villages by judicial councils, while serious 

Administration of Justice during Mauryan Times 

The  king  was  the  head  of  justice,  the  fountainhead  of  the  laws,  and  he  ruled  on  all  matters  of 
significant  consequence.  Mostly  in  towns  and  villages  presided  over  by  pradesika,  mahamatras,  and 
rajukas, there were separate courts. Two types of courts have been established: dharmastheya dealing 
with  civil  matters  and  kantakasodhana  dealing  with  criminal  cases.  At  least  one  court  and  one  police 
head office have been developed in all major towns and headquarters. Petty cases in the villages were 
decided in their panchayats by the village elders. The Hindu Code of Law, as envisaged in the shastras, 
has  been  administered 
in  civil  proceedings.  There  was  reliance  on  the  facts  of  credible 
people. Punishment was very severe, even for small offences like evasion of government’s taxes, giving 
false  evidence,  causing  injury  to  artisans,  ordinary  theft,  etc. In  all  of  these  cases,  the  body  has  been 
mutilated.  Eighteen  kinds  of  torture  have  happened,  including  seven  whippings.  The  penal  code  was 
really relevant. 

The  criminal  code  was  very  harsh  and  enforced  strictly.  The  idea  was  to  set  a  precedent  for 
others and prevent them from wrongdoing. Megasthenes is all praise “for the Mauryan law and order”. 
He  reports  that  “There  were  few  crimes;  murders  and  thefts  were  almost  unknown,  people  rarely 
locked their doors and the state guaranteed the safety of life and property.” 

Guptas Times 

The  Gupta  Empire  was  not  only  imposing  because  of  the  vastness  of  its  structure  but  also 
benevolent.  It  had  constitutional  checks  in  the  form  of  Council  of  Ministers  and  higher  officials  of  the 
states. The whole administration was often guided by judiciously interpreted freedom of constitutional 
uses.  Under  the  Guptas,  the  judicial  administration  was  much  more  developed  than  in  the  initial 
periods.  During  this  period,  a  number  of  law  books  were  compiled  for  the  first  time.  And  there  were 
well  defined  civil  and  criminal  rules.  Chief  judicial  officer  was  called  ‘Mahadandnayak’.  but  the  chief 
judge  was  KING/  SAMRAT.  The  King  was  the  state’s  highest  legal  body  and  therefore  determined  the 
Page 5 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

conflicts. His decisions were absolute, but the king alone could not continue the judicial governance of 
such a large empire. He was also aided in the discharge of his judicial duties by a number of judges. 

The  court  was  divided  into  four  classes:  kings  court,  poog,  shreni,  kulik.  We  have  already 
discussed  types  of  courts.  The  penalty  was  very  mild  during  the  Gupta  period.  Punishments  such  as 
capital punishment and traumatic amputation have seldom been awarded. During the Gupta reign, the 
criminal laws were not as extreme as in the Maurya period. criminal cases were taken before the central 
court,  typically  kept  under  the  King  or  Royal  Authority.  The  method  of  appeal  was  exercised  and  the 
highest body of appeal was the Monarch. The lack of lawyers was one critical trait of the ancient Indian 
legal  system.  Another  noteworthy  characteristic  was  that  it  was  often  chosen  for  a  bench  of  two  or 
three judges to conduct justice rather than for a single person to be the sole justice administrator. 

Relevance of old Justice System in Present Times 

Ancient  India  kept  the  highest  standard  of  any  antiquity.  The  capacity,  learning,  honesty, 
impartiality and freedom of the judiciary have not been overcome and these expectations have not been 
surpassed till now, the Indian judiciary consisted of a hierarchy of judges at the top of the Court of the 
Chief  Justice  (Praadvivaka),  Each  higher  court  is  given  the  right  to  review  the  decision  of  the  lower 
Courts;  the  cases  is  basically  decided  in  line  with  same  principle  of  natural  justice  concepts,  that  in 
criminal trials the accused could not be punished unless his guilt was proved according to law; that in 
civil cases the trial consisted of four stages like any modern trial – plaint, reply, hearing and decree; that 
such doctrines as res judicata (prang nyaya) were familiar to Indian jurisprudence; cases were resolved 
by the panel of several judges unlike today, and no case was resolved singly by any judge. 

The judicial system in modern India 

The legal framework gave by the Constitution of India is involved in the three kinds of courts. At 
the  top,  it  is  Supreme  Court,  at  the  centre  the  High  Courts  and  at  the  base  the  subordinate  Courts 
notwithstanding  the  Constitution,  there  are  different  laws  and  rules  which  direct  the  structure,  force, 
and locale of these courts. Here conversation is given of the apparent multitude of three kinds of courts. 

The role of the Supreme Court 

The  Supreme  Court  in  India  was  established  through  an  enactment  passed  in  pre-independent 
India, with the introduction of the Regulating Act, 1773. the first Supreme Court started its function as a 
court of record at Calcutta, and therefore the 1st judge Sir Elijah Impey was appointed. The court was 
established  to  resolve  the  disputes  in  Bengal,  Orissa,  and  Patna.  Consequently,  in  1800  and  1834,  the 
King Gorge-III established the opposite two  

Supreme Courts in Bombay and Madras. 

However, soon after the enactment of the Indian supreme court Act, 1861, the Supreme Courts in 
Calcutta,  Bombay,  and  Madras  were  consequently  abolished  and  therefore  the  courts  in  Calcutta, 
Bombay,  and  Madras  resumed  its  functioning  as  the  supreme  court.  In  1935,  the  British  Parliament 
enacted  the  govt  of  India  Act,  1935,  after  a  resolution  was  gone  by  the  Joint  committee,  which  was 
headed by Lord Linlithgow. 

The  Government  of  India  Act,  1935,  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  court  in  India,  which  has 
vested more judicial power than the supreme court with original, appellate, and advisory jurisdiction. 
After  independence,  the  Constitution  of  India  was  adopted  on  26th  January  1950,  and  therefore  the 
court of India resumed functioning because of the Supreme Court of India on 28th January 1950, which 
was presided by Hon’ble Justice Harilal Jekisundas Kania. 

As per article 124(1) of the Constitution, there should be a Supreme Court in India that will be 
presided by the judge  of India with additional seven Judges until the parliament passes precedent for 
increasing  the  number  of  Judges.  However,  currently,  there  are  34  judges  within  the  Supreme  Court, 
and therefore the current judge of India is Justice Sharad Arvind Bodbe. 

Page 6 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The role of the High Court  

As  per  the  Indian  Constitution,  Articles  214-231  deals  with  the  provisions  of  High  Courts  in 
India.  It  provides  for  separate  supreme  court  s  for  separate  states  but  consistent  with  the  7th 
constitutional  amendment  act  an  equivalent  high  court  is  often  the  court  for  quite  one  state  resent, 
we’ve 21 high courts within the country, which incorporates 3 common high courts. 

Constitution and composition of High courts 

All the high courts comprise of a Chief Justice and several other judges, who are determined by 
the President of India from occasionally. Article 217 deals with the appointment of judges and state that 
every judge of the high court shall be appointed by the President of India by a warrant under his hand & 
seal after primary consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the state. 

The powers and jurisdiction of the high court are often classified under the following heads: 
1. Original Jurisdiction- it means an applicant can directly attend high court and not through appeals. 
This power is employed within the following matters: 

a. Disputes arising out of concerning members of Parliament and state legislature. 
b. concerning marriage, law, admiralty divorce, contempt of court, etc. 
c. Enforcement of fundamental rights (Supreme Court also has this power). 
d. Cases transferred from another court to itself which involves an issue of law. 

2. Writ Jurisdiction- Article 226 states that the High Court shall have power throughout the territories 
about  which  it  exercises  jurisdiction  to  issue  to  a  person  or  authority  including  in  appropriate  cases, 
any government, within those territories directions, orders, or writs. 
3. Appellate Jurisdiction- It is said that the high court is that the primary court of appeal i.e. it’s the 
power to listen to the appeals against the judgment of the subordinate courts within its territories. This 
power  is  often  classified  into  2  categories-Civil  jurisdiction  and  Criminal  jurisdiction  In  civil  cases  its 
jurisdiction  includes  the  orders  and  judgments  of  the  district  courts,  additional  district  courts,  and 
other subordinate courts. 
In  criminal  cases,  its  jurisdiction  includes  judgments  concerning  sessions  courts  and  extra  sessions 
court.  These  cases  should  be  involving  imprisonment  for  quite  7  years,  confirmation  of  any  death 
sentence awarded by session court before execution 
4.  Power  of  Superintendence  –  The  high  court  has  this  power  over  all  courts  and  tribunals  except 
those  handling  the  soldiers  functioning  within  the  state.  Hence  within  the  exercise  of  this  power,  it’s 
going to: 

e. involve return from such courts. 
f.  May  issue  general  rules  and  prescribe  forms  for  regulating  the  practice  and  proceedings  of 
such courts. 
g.  Prescribe  the  shape  during  which  books  and  accounts  are  being  kept  by  the  officers  of  any 
court. 
h. Settle fees payable to the sheriff clerks, officers and legal practitioners. 

The  constitution  doesn’t  place  any  restriction on  this power  of  superintendence  over  the  subordinate 
courts,  it’s  not  only  using  appeal  by  the  person,  it  is  often  suo  motto.  it’s  of  the  character  of  revision 
because  it  verifies  the sooner  judgments.  In  this  regard,  it  is  considered  as  a  special  function  because 
the Supreme Court has no similar power vis a vis the High Court. 
5.  Control  over  Subordinate  Courts  –  This  point  is  simply  an  extension  of  the  above-mentioned 
supervisory and appellate jurisdiction. It states that the high court can withdraw a case pending before 
any subordinate court if it involves the substantial question of law. The case is often disposed of itself or 
solve  the  question  of  law  and  return  to  an  equivalent  court.  within  the  second  case,  the  opinion 
rendered by the supreme court would be binding on the subordinate court. It also deals with matters 
concerning  posting  promotion,  the  grant  of  leave,  transfer,  and  discipline  of  the  members  therein. 
during this regard, it appoints officers and servants to be made by the chief justice or such other judge 
of high court as the chief justice may direct. 

Page 7 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

6. Court of Record – It involves the recording of judgments, proceedings, and acts of high courts to be 
recorded for the perpetual memory. These records can’t be further questioned in any court. supported 
this record it’s the power to punish for the contempt of court either with simple imprisonment or with 
fine or both. 
7.  Review  –  This  power  of  the  high  court  includes  the  facility  to  look  at  the  constitutionality  of 
legislative  and  executive  orders  of  both  central  and  state  governments.  it’s  to  be  noted  that the  word 
review is not anywhere mentioned in our constitution but Article 13 and 226 explicitly provide the high 
court with this power. 
8. Extension of jurisdiction of the high court to Union Territories – Parliament by law may extend 
the jurisdiction of a high court to or exclude the jurisdiction of a high court from any union territory. 

The role of district courts  

Chapter  VI  under  Part  4  of  the  Constitution  of  India  consists  of  the  provisions  regarding  the 
creation of the subordinate courts in the country. Below the supreme court, there’s the Court of District 
Judge  which  is  the  top  court  among  subordinate  courts.  The  appointment,  posting,  and  promotion  of 
District  Judge  are  made  by  the  Governor  of  the  concerned  State  in  consultation  with  the  concerned 
supreme court. As regards eligibility for the post of the District Judge, a person not already within the 
service of the Union or the State shall only be eligible to be appointed as District Judge if he has been for 
not less than seven years an Advocate or a Pleader and is usually recommended by the concerned High 
Court. 

Appointments of a person apart from District Judges to the judicial service of the State shall be 
made by the Governor of the State following rules made by him therein behalf after consultation with 
concerned State Public Service Commission and with the concerned supreme court. As regards control 
over  subordinate  courts,  including  the  matters  of  posting,  promotion,  leave,  etc.,  the  concerned 
supreme  court  is  vested  with  the  power  to  possess  control  over  subordinate  courts  but  the  supreme 
court is to exercise the control following the conditions of service under the law applicable regarding 
subordinate courts.  

The Governor may by public notification direct the appliance of the provisions of Chapter VI of 
the Constitution and thus the principles made there under on any class or classes of magistrates within 
the concerned State subject to any exception or modification. 

Codification of laws 

The  first  plan  to  modify  the  Muslim  law  of  crime  was  initiated  by  Cornwallis  in  1790.   Lord 
Cornwallis  divested  the  Nizam  of  any  authority  over  the  Nizamat.  He  abrogated  crucial  Muslim  laws 
formulated  by  Abu  Hanifa  that  illogically  maintained  that  a  murdered  wasn’t  responsible  for 
punishment  if  the  crime  was  committed  by  strangling,  drowning,  poisoning,  or  with  a  weapon  which 
wasn’t made from iron. it had been also declared that the kin of the deceased didn’t have any right to 
remit the sentences of the offender. 

The  government  in  1791  also  abolished  the  punishment  of  mutilation  and  imprisonment  and 
hard  labour  were  substituted  in  its  place.  Cornwallis  desired  the  abolition  of  the  rule  under  which  a 
murderer wasn’t held susceptible to execution if he committed by drowning poisoning etc. The Muslim 
law didn’t permit a Hindu to testify against Muslims accused this law was now abolished. 

As some confusion existed on certain points within the law of homicide the law was restated in 
1797 through regulation for the aim of regulation was to try to away finally with all operations of the 
desire  of  the  heirs.  just  in  case  of  murder  it  had  been  laid  down  that  a  prisoner  convicted  of  willful 
murder was to be punished with none regard to the heirs of the person killed. Another innovation made 
at that point was to substitute imprisonment for blood money, In cases where under the Muslim law, an 
individual  convicted  of  homicide  was  susceptible  to  pay  blood  money  the  court  of  the  circuit  was  to 
commute the fine to imprisonment for such period as it is considered adequate for the offence. 

Page 8 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Regulation  XIV  of  1791  was  a  crucial  measure  which  was  inspired  by  humanitarian  and 
benevolent sprit as it granted relief to the person already in prison on account of their inability to pay 
blood money. Regulation 17 of 1797 severe punishment was prescribed with a view to the offence. 

Several  changes  were  made  to  the  legal  code  1799-1802  by  the  govt  of  Lord  Wellesley. 
consistent with Regulation of 1799 not was any murder to be justifiable and altogether cases of murder 
the offenders were to be punished by death. The regulation 18 of 1801 laid that a private convicted of 
getting  deliberately  and  maliciously  intended  to  murder  an  individual  and  accidentally  killed  another 
individual was to be susceptible to suffer death. Regulation 16 of 1802 had abolished the criminal and 
disgusting  and  inhuman  practice  of  sacrificing  young  and  innocent  children  and  declared  infanticide 
punishable as willful murder susceptible to a sentence of death. 

The process of altering and adapting the Muslim law of crimes continued the process of giving 
punishments for perjury and forgery were enhanced through the introduction of Regulation II of 1807. 
Exemplary  punishments  were  prescribed  for  Dacoity  through  Regulations  VIII  of  1808  because  the 
crime has increased enormously. By Regulations XVII of 1817, the law relating to Adultery was revised. 
The  necessity  for  four  competent  male  witnesses  was  rigorously  insisted  upon  and  the  presumptive 
proof wasn’t regarded sufficient to warrant a conviction for the offence. The regulation laid down that 
conviction  for  the  offence  of  adultery  might  be  supported  confessions,  creditable  testimony  or 
circumstantial evidence. the utmost punishment to be inflicted for the offence was fixed at thirty-nine 
stripes  and  imprisonment  with  the  hard  labour  of  up  to  seven  years.  Married  women  weren’t  to  be 
prosecuted on such charges. 

After 1833, an All India Legislature was created and thru subsequent reforms through the years 
led  to  the  enactment  of  the  Indian  legal  code  in  1860.  During  the  amount  from  1833-1860,  changes 
were  made  within  the  legal  code  and  therefore  the  important  ones  included  that  thugs  came  to  be 
punished with imprisonment for all times with the hard labour, the status of slavery was declared to be 
non-recognizable in any court of the corporate, dacoits came to be punished with transportation for all 
times,  or  with  imprisonment  for  any  shorter  term  with  hard  labour.  it’s  going  to  even  be  mentioned 
punishments prescribed for offences by British Administrators were very severe initially, intending to 
suppress crime. But as society stabilized, and law and order situation improved, and incidence of crime 
lessened,  liberalizing  tendencies  set  in  and  therefore  the  rigours  of  punishment  were  somewhat 
mitigated 

The Indian Penal Code, 1860 

The  government  in  Britain  in  1833 appointed  a  commission  referred  to  as  the  “Indian  Law 
Commission” to discuss the jurisdiction, powers and rules of existing courts and to form reports setting 
forth  the  results  of  the  inquiries  and  suggesting  reforms.  The  law  commission  works  on  the  Anglo-
Indian Codes from 1834 to 1879 and one among the foremost important contributions of the primary 
Law  Commission  was  the  Indian  penal  code,  submitted  by  Macaulay  in  1837  and  passed  into  law  in 
1860. Another important law that was codified was the code of criminal procedure. 
Difference between civil and criminal law 

S.no   Parameters  

h 

Meaning 

l 

Liability  

related 

Civil Law  
Civil 
law  deals  with 
acts 
to 
to  which 
individuals 
harm  caused  can  be 
by 
repaid 
or 
compensation 
monetary relief.  
It  creates  a  private  It  creates  a  liability  for  the 

Criminal Law 
Criminal 
law  deals  with  a 
crime that causes damage to a 
person  which  is  an  offence 
against  society  as  well.  The 
relief of crime committed is to 
the  person  with 
charge 
Imprisonment.  

Page 9 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

or 

an 
an 

against 

liability 
individual 
organisation.  
Justice 
is  given  by 
providing  monetary 
the 
against 
relief 
damages in most cases.  
Cases  under  Civil  law 
are  triable  under  Civil 
Court  or  equivalent 
tribunals.  
Objective of Civil law is 
resolution 
dispute 
between Individuals  
Code 
Procedure, 1908 
Less 
Criminal  
In  Civil  Cases 
aggrieved  party 
the case  

the 
files 

grave 

than 

Civil 

of 

Normally in Civil Cases, 
the case can be directly 
filed to the Court.   

Infringement of private 
rights  
Corporate  law,  Family 
law, 
law, 
Property 
Media  law,  Sports  law 
etc. 
Negligence,  Invasion  of 
privacy, Trespass etc.  

preparator  against 
and the victim.   

society 

Justice  is  given  by  providing 
the accused imprisonment for 
a term or fine or both.  

Cases  under  Criminal  law  are 
tried  under  Criminal  Court  or 
Sessions Court.  

Objective  of  Criminal  law  is 
providing justice to the victim 
by punishing the accused.  
Code  of  Criminal  Procedure, 
1973 

More grave than Civil 

Cases, 

Criminal 

In 
the 
government  files  on  behalf  of 
the victim 
In  Criminal  Cases,  the  case 
needs  to  be  registered  in  the 
police  office  before  the  court 
directly 

Infringement of public rights  

No diversion as such 

Murder,  Rape,  Kidnapping, 
theft etc.  

Punishment  

t 

Triable  

Objective  

Procedural 
Law  
Gravity 
offences  

of 

Filing  of  the 
case  

g 

r 

Registration  

Infringement  

Branches  

. 

Examples  of 
Acts  

When  it  had  been  first  passed  in  1861,  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  fiercely  guarded 
“privileges” or “rights” as they were alternatively described as and made the law both a symbolic and an 
actual  marker  of  imperial  power  The  code  secured  the  legal  superiority  of  “European-born  British 
subjects  “by  reserving  to  them  special  privileges  like  the  proper  to  a  jury  trial  with  a  majority  of 
European jurors, amenability only to British judges and magistrates, and limited punishments, all this 
while maintaining and displaying European power and prestige.  

1.2 Concept of Crime, Components of Crime and Criminal Liability 
Concept of Crime 

The  definition  of  Crime  is  beautifully  quoted  by  Lord  William  Blackstone,  an  eminent  English 
jurist of eighteenth-century A.D. that, “ Crime as an act committed or omitted in violation of public-law 
either  forbidding  or  commanding  it”.  In  this  definition,  Lord  Blackstone  has  emphasized  crime  as  the 
harm or injury carried out on the community at large. 

Page 10 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Early  ideas  about  crime  were  either  linked  to  religion  or  property.  Immoral  acts,  moralities  and 
sacrilege  was  considered  sins  (which  was  equivalent  to  crime)  and  was  primarily  dealt  with  by  the 
church. Besides this, the church also maintained law and order, discipline and probity. 

Ingredients of Crime 

There are four elements or ingredients which are necessary for the commission of crime: 

Human Being 

The  first  ingredient  required  for  a  crime  is  that  the  unlawful  act  must  be  done  by  a  human.  In 
ancient  times,  when  criminal  law  was  dictated  by  the  concept  of  retribution,  punishments  were 
imposed on humans as well as animals for causing any harm. For e.g. often horses or cows were killed 
for causing harm to human beings like kicking a man or destroying property. 

This  concept  was  not  considered  much  logical  consequently  discarded.  The  rules  of  crime  and 
criminal  jurisprudence  have  been  amended  time  and  time  again  for  refinement.  Now,  the  first 
ingredient of crime is a human being. It is mandatory that the human being or person must be under a 
legal  duty  to  act  in  a  specific  manner  and  should  be  fit  for  rewarding  punishments.  Further, Section 
11 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) 1860 elaborates on this concept and states that the word “person” aside 
from a human being may include a Company or Association or body of persons, whether incorporated 
or not. Therefore, the word “person” may include artificial or juridical persons as well. 

Mens Rea (Guilty Mind)  

The  second  significant  ingredient  of  the  crime  is  mens  rea  or  evil  mind  or  intentions.  This  is 
based  on  the  maxim,  “actus  non  facit  reum  nisi  mens  sit  rea”  which  means  guilty  acts  and  guilty 
intentions  together  comprise  crime.  Every  crime  requires  a  mental  element  or  ingredient  which  is 
considered  as  the  basic  principle  of  criminal  liability.  Therefore,  no  person  can  be  punished  in  a 
criminal proceeding unless it can be shown that he had a guilty mind. 

Actus Reus (Guilty Act or Omission)  

The third essential ingredient of crime is Actus Reus or Guilty Act. This term (Actus Reus) was 
first used by Prof.Kenny. Actus Reus is the manifestation of Mens Rea in the external world. It denotes 
the act done by a person in furtherance of his mens rea or guilty intention. In criminal law, along with 
mens rea, it’s important to prove the actus reus of the accused in order to convict him for an offence. 
Injury 

The fourth requirement for the commission of crime is Injury. This injury could be to a specific 
person  or  society  as  a  whole. Section  44  of  Indian  Penal  Code  (IPC)  1860, describes  that  the  injury 
caused should be done illegally by the offender and could be to the body, mind, reputation or property 
of the person. 

Classification of Crime 

Almost every legal system divides crimes into several categories for various purposes connected 

with the working of the court. The Common Law primitively divides crime into two 
Categories: 
Common law 
Felonies(गु
गु
गु
गु

ंडागद(cid:7278)) 
ंडागद(cid:7278)
ंडागद(cid:7278)
ंडागद(cid:7278)

In  this  type,  the  crimes  are  generally  heinous  and  of  grave  nature.  These  types  of  crimes  are 
mostly punished with death and confiscation of the perpetrator’s land and goods to the crown. At the 
outset,  the  police  have even  the power  to  arrest  a person  on  basis  of mere  suspicion that  he/she  had 
committed the offence. 

Page 11 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

तु(cid:6994)छ जुम(cid:6981)) 
Misdemeanor’s (तु(cid:6994)छ जुम(cid:6981)
तु(cid:6994)छ जुम(cid:6981)
तु(cid:6994)छ जुम(cid:6981)

In  this  type,  the  crimes  are  mostly  trivial  and  small  ones.  These  types  of  crimes  are  generally 
punishable by fines or imprisonment. Herein, the police have no right or power to arrest a person on 
basis of mere suspicion or doubt. 

In the early nineteenth century, theft was considered a felony regardless of the amount stolen. 
On the other hand,  fraud or deception was considered as misdemeanour irrespective of how serious it 
was.  Thus,  there  was  no  distinction  with  regard  to  the  gravity  of  the  offence  committed.  This 
discrepancy could be attributed to the fact that the growth of law at the time was sluggish and stagnant. 
However,  in  the  late  1960s,  the  above-mentioned  system  was  amended  to  provide  a  distinction 
between such offences and make the law more effectual and justifiable. 

Indian law 
The Criminal Procedure Code (Cr.P.C.) classifies all the crimes into two categories: 

1.  cognizable offences; and 
2.  non-cognizable offences. 

First  Schedule  of  the  Cr.P.C. gives  the  classification  of  the  offenses  of  the  IPC  into  Cognizable(ह(cid:7021)त(cid:6979)ेप-
यो(cid:6991)य ) and Non-Cognizable(गैर सं(cid:6980)ेय) categories: 
यो(cid:6991)य )  
Cognizable(ह(cid:7021)त(cid:6979)ेप
ह(cid:7021)त(cid:6979)ेप----यो(cid:6991)य 
यो(cid:6991)य 
यो(cid:6991)य 
ह(cid:7021)त(cid:6979)ेप
ह(cid:7021)त(cid:6979)ेप

A Cognizable offense or case is defined as the one which an officer-in-charge of a police station 
may investigate without the order of a magistrate and effect arrest without a warrant. The Police have a 
direct responsibility to take immediate action on the receipt of a complaint or of credible information in 
such crimes, visit the scene of the crime, investigate the facts, apprehend the offender and arraign him 
before a Court of law having jurisdiction over the matter.  

गैर सं(cid:6980)ेय)  
Non-Cognizable(गैर सं(cid:6980)ेय
गैर सं(cid:6980)ेय
गैर सं(cid:6980)ेय

Non-Cognizable crimes are defined as those which cannot be investigated by police without the 
order of a competent magistrate. The Police do not initiate an investigation in Non-Cognizable crimes 
except with magisterial permission.  

Measurement of Crimes 

Evaluating  the  extent  of  crime  actually  committed  is  a  quite  complicated  and  arduous  task. 
Statistical data for recorded crime don’t generally provide a precise picture, because they are affected 
by variable factors like the willingness of the victim to report a crime. It is quite obvious that officially 
reported  crimes  are  only  a  small  fraction  of  actual  crimes  committed.  The  public  opinion  of  crime  is 
largely acquired from the print media and digital media as the 
media mostly focuses on serious and sensational crimes which result in public’s distorted perception. 
Another  precise  view  is  mostly  provided  by  the  comprehensive  stats  of  crime  that  are  gathered  and 
published  by  the  government  departments  like The  National  Crime  Records  Bureau  (NCRB)  which 
provides  annual  data  related  to  crime  in  the  country.  Similarly,  the Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation 
(FBI) publishes crime stats annually which is known as Uniform Crime Reports.  

However,  it  is  known  that  a  lot  of  crimes  go  unreported  and  as  a  result  the  data  often  gets 
distorted.  Other  factors  accounting  for  the  distortion  is  the  magnitude  to  which  police  resources  are 
aimed  towards  the  investigation  of  one  kind  of  crime  rather  than  another,  specifically  with  regard  to 
“Victimless  Crimes”  such  as  possession  of  drugs.  These  types  of  crimes  are  not  revealed  unless  the 
police gather their efforts to look into them. 

Additionally, another factor that can have a noteworthy effect on the evident statistical incidence 
of a specific type of a crime is a change in the willingness of a victim to report the crime to the police. 
Victims frequently fail to report the crime due to various reasons: lack of awareness, lack of trust and 
lack of confidence to report the crime.  

Page 12 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Approaches to Crime 

Crime  is  a  relative  and  dynamic  concept  which  keeps  on  changing  with  the  passage  of  time. 
Consistent  with  the  perspective  of  taking  crime  as  an  ordinary  and  unavoidable  part  of  life,  there  are 
often  very  few  expectations  that  reactions  to  crime  will  affect  future  criminality.  The  approaches  to 
crime have been different in different stages of human civilization and had been distinct in dissimilar 
societies.  The  mental  outlook  towards  crime  has  always  been  pronounced  by  extreme  emotions  and 
sentiments shown by society and its people. 
There are various approaches to crime. They are mentioned below: 

1.  Traditional Approach 
2.  Modern Approach 
3.  Sociological Approach 
4.  Psychological Approach 
5.  Legal Approach 

From the above-mentioned approaches to the crime, only three have been discussed below. 

Sociological Approach to Crime 

Environmental  determinants  like  physical,  social,  economical,  cultural  and  political  may  shape 
the  behavior  and  attitude  of  people.  Meager  social,  physical  and  family  environment  may  lead  the 
person to strengthen his intentions towards the crime. Living in poverty and destitution, lack of social 
support and pessimistic familial background may increase the possibility of occurrence of criminal acts 
in the society. Furthermore, unemployment, illiteracy and lack of awareness add to the risks of criminal 
acts.  Crime  can  be  the  repercussion  of  defective  social  structure  and  persons  living  in  those  societies 
may learn criminal acts because of socialization. 

The Strain Theory given by Merton in 1938 is based on a socio-structural outlook. According to 
this theory, the social structure within the society can give rise to criminal acts in society. When people 
experience  stress  or  strain  in  their  lives,  they  start  to  behave  like  criminals  to  reduce  the  negativity 
from their lives. On the basis of general Strain Theory, two general types of strain or stress can lead  to 
committing of criminal acts by a person: 

1.  i) when someone prevents an individual from achieving his goals;  
2.  ii) when someone takes valuable things owned by an individual.  
The  goals  mentioned  above  could  be  money,  status  or  autonomy  from  adolescents.  If  there  are 
limited ways to achieve these goals, people will stick to committing criminal acts even by using illegal 
ways. Moreover, if anything which is precious to an individual is snatched away, it is likely that he will 
go to all extent to restore it, even if he has to take up unlawful means. 

Most  of  the  recent  Sociological  theories  concentrate  on  the  bigger  social  environment  like 

communities. Researchers and analysts try to comprehend why some societies have a higher 
crime  rate  than  others.  These  questions  further  gave  rise  to  the Social  Disorganization  Theory. This 
theory  is  defined  as  the  inability  of  members  of  a  particular  community  or  society  to  achieve  shared 
values.  These  societies  or  communities  have  poor  living  standards,  finite  resources,  residential 
instability, family disruption, population density, and ethnic diversity. These situations may halt public 
integration and further increase in criminal activities. 

Psychological approach to Crime 

Due to the collaboration of Psychology and Criminology, new fields and disciplines emerged in 
the  field  of  education  like  Forensic  Psychology,  Legal  Psychology  and  Criminological  Psychology. 
Psychological  researchers  try  to  scrutinize  the  effect  of 
individual  differences,  personality 
characteristics and psychological strands of criminal acts while criminologists try to analyze the causes 
and  reasons  of  an  individual’s  criminal  acts.  This  is  the  prime  reason  why  psychological  theories  are 
created to analyze the behaviour of the offender. 

Page 13 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Psychodynamic  Trait Theory given  by  Sigmund  Freud  in  the  late  1800s  has  proved  to  be  an 
effective  approach  in  the  history  of  crime  studies  and  research.  According  to  this  theory,  childhood 
experiences  forge  the  future  interpersonal  relationships  of  persons.  Id,  ego  and  superego  affect  the 
behavior of persons. Id is the primeval part that controls our requirements for food, desires, sleep and 
other fundamental instincts. The Ego controls Id by setting up limits and due to Superego, people judge 
the  situation,  reflecting  the  morality  and  rules  of  society.  This  idea  supports  that  the  criminal  is 
possessed  with  Id  dominated  personality  and behaviour.  If  the  ego  doesn’t  control  id,  the  person  will 
behave  like  a  criminal.  These  persons  have  some  communicational  and  social  complications  which 
result in the happening of crime. 

Various psychologists also found the effects of empathy and altruism on the approaches to crime. 
Empathy  is  an  emotional  and  cognitive  capacity  to  perceive  the  feelings  and  agony  of  others.  While 
altruism  is  an  active  concern  for  others  welfare.  Studies  proved  that  the  lower  level  of  empathy  and 
altruism causes greater anti-social behavior and criminal acts. Moreover, 

impulsiveness  and  negative  sentimentality  are  other  influenced  personality  traits  and 
characteristics which may increase criminal acts due to the fact that impulsive person act and behave 
without  thinking  of  consequences  while  a  negative  sentimentality  trait  can’t  control  their  behavior. 
Behavioral  Psychology,  on  the  other  hand,  claims  that  people  learn  their  behaviours  through 
punishments and rewards. Thus, the criminal activities may increase with reinforcements and decrease 
with punishments and retribution. 

Legal Approach to Crime 
During  most  of  the  time  when  the  sphere  of  criminology  was  being  developed,  people  supposed  that 
crime  was  a  behavior  that  had  been  judged  to  be  a  violation  of  the  criminal  law.  This  concept  was 
clearly expressed by an eminent criminologist, Paul Tappan in 1947 when he noticed that “ crime is an 
intentional act in violation of Criminal Law which includes( statutes, case laws, acts) committed without 
defence or excuse and penalized by the state as a felony or misdemeanor”. Obviously, in this approach 
crime is factually easy to fathom, but it suffers from the relativity of criminal law and the operation of 
the criminal justice system. Explanations and clarification of crime would have to be relative to the legal 
system and historical period and could not have a standing of scientific explanations. 
A powerful legal system and target hardening may decrease the rate of crime in a society. Especially, the 
efficacy of laws and punishments may decrease criminal acts. The fair legal system shapes and outlines 
the decision-making process of potential criminals positively. 

Components of Crime 

A Crime is an unlawful Act punished by the state or any lawful authority. A crime or an offence is 
an act which is harmful not only to the person but also to the community, society or state. Such acts are 
forbidden and punished by law. 

Every crime violates the law but every violation of the law does not commit a crime. 

Greed, anger, jealousy, revenge or pride are the main reason for committing a crime. 

The elements of a crime should be legal in nature (must be in law), Actus Reus (human conduct), 
causation (human conduct must cause harm), harm (to some other/thing), concurrence (state of mind 
and human conduct), Mens rea (state of mind and guilty), Punishment. 
The  essential  ingredient  of  crime  blameworthy  condition  of  mind.  Its  absence  cannot  make  a  person 
liable. 
Stages of Crime: 

1) The intention is the first stage of a crime. 
2) Preparation is the second stage of crime. 
3) The third stage is an attempt. It is direct movement of an Act towards execution of an Act after 
preparation of the plan. 
4) The fourth stage is the accomplishment 

Page 14 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Act to be Voluntary  

Crime  is  the  product  of  our  own  choice  and  our  own  independent  will.  The  Act  should  be 
voluntary. The Act done by a person must be of conscious choice to constitute a voluntary Act for which 
he is held criminally liable. The voluntary Act is an Act that does not fully result from independent will 
are  committed  with  extreme  indifference  to  inhuman  life.  A  conscious  person  who  loaded  a  gun  at 
others will typically be held liable for any harm that results during accidental discharge because loading 
the gun is treated as a voluntary activity.   

Fundamental elements of a crime 

To  establish  criminal  liability,  crime  can  be  broken  down  into  elements  which  a  prosecution 

must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. There are basically four elements of a crime are as follows: 
1) Human being: Section 11  

Human  being  must  commit  wrongful  Act  to  fulfill  first  element  of  a  crime  that  means  any  non 
living  thing  or  animals  are  not  considered  in  the  category  of  a  person  or  a  human  being  whereas  in 
ancient times when criminal law was closely dominated  by the idea of ritter bit theory punishment was 
also  inflicted  on  animals  for  the  injury  caused  by  them.  For  Example,  if  a  dog  bites  anyone  he  is 
punished a horse was killed for kicking a man but in Indian Penal Code if animal cause injury we do not 
make animal liable but the owner is held liable for such injury so the first element of crime is human 
beings  who  must  be  given  appropriate  punishment  and  should  be  under  legal  obligation  to  held 
criminally  liable.  ‘Person’  is  defined  in Section  11 of  Indian  Penal  Code  which  includes  company, 
association  or  body  of  persons  whether  incorporated  or  not.  The  word  person  includes  artificial  or 
juridical persons. He is a legal entity created by law which is not a natural person such as corporation 
created  under  state  statute.  It  is  a  legal  entity  having  a  distinguished  identity  and  legal  rights  and 
obligation under the law.  

2) Mens rea or Guilty intention 
The second element is derived from the famous maxim Actus Non-Facit Reum Nisi Mens Sit Rea. This 
maxim is divided into two parts. The first part-  

1.  a) mens rea (guilty mind); 
2.  b)  Actus reus ( guilty act ). 

It means the guilty intention and guilty Act together constitute a crime. It comes from a maxim that no 
person can be punished in a proceeding of criminal nature unless it can be shown he has a guilty mind. 
The  second  element  is  Mens  rea  which  can  be  explained  in  various  forms  a  guilty  mind;  a  guilty  or 
wrongful purpose; a criminal intent, guilty knowledge and willfulness all constitute the same thing that 
mens rea.  

Motive  and  Intention  are  both  aspects  in  the  field  of  law  and  justice  both  are  very  important. 
They  are  also  associated  with  the  purpose  of  proving  or  disproving  a  particular  case  or  crime  Wrong 
motive with guilty intention is necessary to prove criminal liability.   

3) Actus reus or illegal Act or omission 
It is the Latin term used to describe a criminal Activity. It is commonly defined as a criminal activity that 
was  the  result  of  voluntarily  bodily  movement.  This  describes  a  physical  Activity  that  harms  another 
person  or  damages  property.  In  other  words,  due  to  guilty  or  wrongful  intention,  some  overAct  or 
illegal omission must take place. There are two types of Actus reus first is commission and the second 
one  is  an  omission.  The  commission  is  as  a  criminal  activity  that  was  the  result  of  voluntarily  body 
movement.  This  describes  a  physical  Activity  that  harms  a  person  or  property.  Against  human  body 
includes physical assault, murder, hurt, grievance, hurt etc & property includes theft, decoity, extortion 
etc. 

The omission is another form of Actus reus as an Act of criminal negligence. An omission could 
be falling to warn others that you have created a dangerous situation, for eg. not feeling an infant who 
has been left in your care or not completing a work-related task which resulted in an accident.    

Page 15 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

4) Injury under Section 44 

The fourth requirement of a crime is injury should be caused to another person or to society at 
large.  According  to Section  44 of   Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  the  injury  is  defined  as  any  harm  illegally 
caused to any person in body, mind, reputation or property by another person. Elements of crime are a 
set of facts that must be proven to convict a defendant of a crime. Criminal elements are sets forth in 
criminal statutes or cases in jurisdictions that allow for common law crimes.  
Actus Reus  
Meaning 

It is a Latin term for the guilty Act. The Act you need to commit an offence. It must be a voluntary 
Act Actually doing something eg taking a bracelet in a theft. It is not an involuntary Act. An example of 
an involuntary Act given in the case of Hill vs Baxter was someone losing control of a car because they 
are attacked by a swarm of bees or because they have a heart attack. 

Actus reus is such a result of human conduct as law seeks to prevent. It should be prohibited by 
law.  It  is  a  physical  aspect  of  the  crime.  There  are  basically  two  main  components  of  criminal  law  is 
Actus Reus and Mens Rea. 

Actus  Reus  is  the  wrongful  Act  or  task  committed  by  a  person  and  Mens  Rea  is  the  state  of 
mental aptitude behind such Acts. Mens rea is a term from which a famous Latin maxim Actus Non-Facit 
Reum Nisi Mens Sit Rea had been derived. Actus Non-Facit Reum Nisi Mens Sit Rea further explains as 
to  how  Mens  Rea  is  applicable  in  committing  an  offence  or  a  crime.  It  states  that  if  a  guilty  mind  or 
intent is accompanied by a wrongful Act then only the person will be held liable. This maxim is used to 
determine whether an Act committed by a person is an offence or crime or not. Severe penal Actions are 
required for crimes committed with specific intentions and not for unanticipated or unintentional Acts. 
However,  no  breach  of  law  cannot  be  unpunished.  To  differentiate  between  intentional  and 
unintentional criminal Act this legal maxim is established so that the type of punishment can be decided 
accordingly. There can be no crime and no suit for damages can arise without a guilty Act. 

General Principles Of Actus Reus  

The general rule of Actus Reus is no liability for failing to Act unless at the time of failure to Act 

the defendant was under a legal duty to take positive action. 

The duty arises from statute- Children and young person Act, 1933 (UK), omission culpable by 

people over the age of 16 falling to look after a child under 16. 

The  duty  arises  from  a  contract-  Failure  to  perform  the  contractual  duty  in  question  can 

perform the basis of criminal liability.  
The duty owed to family members- R VS Gibbons and proctor 14 Crapp-man and his wife were guilty 
of murder by failing to feed the man daughter.  

A Mere omission to Act cannot be lead to criminal liability unless a statute specifically provides 
or a common-law imposes a duty on it. Moral duty should be distinguished from the legal duty of an Act. 

Causation in Crime  

Causation doctrine can be boiled  down to the question of  whether the defendant illegal Action 
was  an  operative  and  substantial  cause  of  harm  which  resulted.  The  question  which  the  court  asked 
was ‘but for’. ‘But For’ defendant Action, the harm has occurred. For example, Albert poisoning victoria 
when victoria dying of a heart attack before the poison takes effect to put events in another way around 
however it does make a difference shooting the life of someone with terminal illness causing their death 
because without the illegal conduct they would not have died at the time and in those circumstances. 

The  ‘But  For’  doctrine  however  still  involve  a  lot  of  potential  causes  also  we  also  ask  for  legal 
causation that is whether the defendant Action is the operative and substantial cause of harm. This is 
most significant where the Action and inAction of another person or the victim themselves change the 
normal  course  of  events.  This  is  known  as  nervous  Actus  intervenes  and  a  new  intervening  Act. 

Page 16 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Professor  hard  and  honour  develop  this  principle  using  the  distinction  between  those  circumstances 
that  are  apart  of  factual  background  or  conditions  and  those  who  are  causes.  They  point  out  that  in 
order to start a fire u need a drop match, oxygen, and combustion material but we will only the cause of 
that  fire.  In  this  case,  oxygen  and  flammable  material  are  normal  ways  whereas  causes  the  dropped 
match is abnormal and in their view, abnormal things can only be causes. The question of what things 
are abnormal. It was emphasized that only free voluntarily and an informal Act of a third party can be 
abnormal and break the chain of causation. 

In  the  case  of R  vs  Smith defendant,  a  soldier  got  in  a  fight  at  an  army  and  stabbed  another 
soldier the injured soldier was taken to a hospital but was dropped twice at route .once their treatment 
given was described as wrong .they failed to diagnose that his lung was punctured and the soldier died. 
The defendant was convicted of murder and the appeal contended that if the victim was given correct 
medical treatment he would not have died. It was held that the stab wound was an operating cause of 
death and therefore conviction was upheld. In such cases, the court was reluctant to lead the defendant 
complaints that their victim was have survived if they had received proper medical care.   

Causa causes (कारणकारणकारणकारण) 

Causa causes literally means the primary cause or the originator of Action. It is the reason for all 
the causes. Damages that resulted from all the causes are generally referred by causa causes. To get the 
damages the defendant illegal Act must cause harm that should be proved by the claimant. There is no 
need  to  prove  the  original  cause  of  harm  by  the  defendant.  However,  while  determining  the  cause  of 
harm the court will consider the proper explanation given by the defendant for the original cause of the 
harm. 

Minimal Causation  
Moti Singh v. the State of UP 

Moti Singh and Jagdamba Prasad appellants together with five other persons were convicted by 
the  session  judge  of  Unnao  of  offences  under  Section  148,  Section  302,  read  with  Section  149  and 
Section  307.  Each  of  them  was  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  under  Section  302  read  with  Section 
149  of the Indian Penal Code. It was alleged that the accused party members fired with guns and pistols 
both from inside and outside the room on the other side of passage when the victim party passed along 
with  the  passage.  The  evidence  relied  on  for  the  conviction  of  Moti  Singh  consists  of  the  dying 
declaration  Ex  kha  75  of  Gaya  charan  and  presumably  also  of  the  statements  of  the  prosecution 
witnesses  as  HC  has  not  specifically  stated  so.  Again,  HC  relied  on  exhibit  Kha  75,  the  alleged  dying 
declaration of Gaya charan as deciding, factor in deciding the number of persons who had taken part in 
firing from the room and from the platform. The result is that the statement of Gaya charan Ex Kha 75 is 
inadmissible in evidence. It was a mainstay of the judgment of HC upholding the finding of the session. 
Appellants  were  among  the  persons  who  had  fired  from  room  and  platform.  It  therefore  accordingly 
allowed  appeals  the  order  of  the  HC  and  acquit  Moti  Singh  and  Jagdamba  prasad  of  the  offences  they 
were convicted of and hold that Moti Singh and Jagdamba prasad have not been to have taken part in 
that incident. It was directed that they are released forthwith, if not required to be detained under any 
process of law. Appeal allowed by the court. 

Rewarm v. the State of MP 

In this appeal, the conviction was challenged by appellant rewarm. Under sec 302 of the Penal 
Code for which he has been sentenced to imprisonment for life for committing the murder of this wife. 
The prosecution case is four children and appellant resided with deceased Gyanwati Bai in the house of 
Bhurkin Bai. It was found that the appellant was standing close to her and she was lying close to her bed 
in  the  pool  of  bed.  Dr  Mahajan  performed  post  mortem  examination  and  found  numerous  incised 
wounds  on  the  persons  of  the  deceased.  As  per  the  report,   in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  to  cause 
death  he  opined  that  injury  no  5  as  written  in  the  report  was  sufficient.  Due  to  effective  medical 
treatment,  Gyanta  bai  had  recovered  from  the  shock.SHRI  Datt  relied  upon  a  decision  of  this  court  in 
Page 17 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

NOOR  Khan  vs  the  state  of  MP.  In  that  case,  the  medical  evidence  was  used  to  refer  to  the  injuries 
sustained.  In  the  result,  the  appeal  was  not  allowed  and  not  implemented.  Under  Section  302  of  the 
Penal  Code,  the  conviction  of  the  appellant  Rewaram  with  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  life  is 
confirmed. 

Unexpected Interventions  
Harjinder Singh v. Delhi administration 

In  this  case,  a  fight  took  place  between  Dalip  Kumar  and  Harjinder  Singh,  appellant  near  the 
water tap in front of a tin factory in Zamirwali lane, Delhi. Harjinder Singh was badly injured in the fight 
and  he  then  left  the  place  holding  out  a  threat  that  he  would  teach  a  lesson  to  Dalip  Kumar.  The 
appellant  returned  with  his  brother  Amarjit  Singh  to  go  away  but  either  these  two  or  Dalip  Kumar 
pulled out of the house into the lane and gave him beating near lamp post in Zamirwali lane. It seems to 
us that High Courts has not considered whether the third ingredient has been proven in this case or not. 
In  our  opinion,  the  circumstances  justify  the  inference  that  the  accused  did  not  cause  to  intend  the 
injury. When the appellant struck the deceased with the knife, he must have known that the deceased 
being than being in a bent position.  In these circumstances, he struck the deceased with the knife with 
the  intention  to  cause  an  injury  likely  to  cause  death  was  quite  legitimate.  The  appeal  is  allowed  and 
conviction is altered from Section 302 to Section 304. 

Mens rea  

An Act becomes a crime when it is committed with evil intention. Evil intention or guilty mind is 
essential to commit a crime otherwise a person cannot be held liable and punished. Mens rea is based 
on a well-known maxim. Actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea which means Act does not make a man 
guilty  unless  his  intention  was  so.  Earlier  in  English  criminal  law,  there  was  no  distinction  between 
crime and tort. Criminal law was based on strict liability and punishment in those days was mainly in 
the form of monetary compensation. Therefore mental element in crime was irrelevant but later bodily 
punishment came in substitute of damages. Now from here, mens rea got importance. Mental element in 
crime  was  recognised  as  this  time  With  the  passage  of  the  time,  mens  rea  become  an  element  in 
deciding  crime.  For  any  criminal  liability,  the  Act  should  be  voluntarily  committed.  No  person  can  be 
held liable for an Act done under any fear or compulsion. For example, A points revolver on B and say to 
open  the  lock  of  the  house  of  C.  Here  B  Act  is  not  voluntary  but  it  was  against  his  will.  Intention  and 
motive is a different element of a crime Motive may be good or bad but if the Intention is not good then 
the person is held liable for the crime.  
For example, if A steals bread from a shop due to hunger. Here the motive is good but still, he is liable 
for stealing. 

R VS PRINCE 

Prince took away a girl below 16 yrs of age from the position of father and against the will of her 
father. Prince argued that the girl told him that she was of 18 yrs and the intention was bonafide as she 
was looking like 18 yrs or above. In this case, the court has held that he cannot be given the benefit of 
the doctrine of mens rea because this is the case of mistake of law, taking away a girl below 16 yrs is 
unlawful hence he was held guilty.    

General Principles  

Actus Non-Facit Reum Nisi Mens Sit Rea – An Act does not itself make one guilty unless the mind 
is also guilty This  guilty mind is known as Mens Rea. There are two elements of mens rea first one is 
intended to do Act and the second one is knowledge of the circumstances that make the Act a criminal 
offence. Mens rea takes on different types in the different surrounding that is what is evil intent for one 
type of criminal offence may not be so for another kind. For example, in case of murder intent to goes is 
mens rea then in case of theft intent to steal is mens rea. 

Other Forms of Mens Rea: 

Page 18 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

1) Intention; 
2) Motive; 
3) Knowledge; 
4) Recklessness;  
5) Negligence. 

These all refer to different types of mental aptitude which constitutes mens rea.  

Mens rea in the Indian Penal Code 1860  
Kartar Singh v. the State of Punjab  

The SC held that statutory penal provision must be read with the elements of mens rea unless a 

statute either expressly or by necessary implication rules it out. 
Intention  

It is the purpose or design for which an Action has been done. The intention is basically Position 
of  mind  at  a  particular  time  in  committing  an  offence  and  will  of  accused  to  see  the  effects  of  his 
unlawful effect.  

Hyam Vs DPP  

D,  in  order  to  frighten  Mrs  booth  put  burning  newspaper  in  the  letterbox  of  booth  house  fire 
spread and two children, died  D not meant to kill, but foreseen death or grievous bodily injury as a high 
probable result D is guilty she knew about the result of her conduct sufficient mens rea for murder. The 
intention not only means a specific intention but also generic intention. Section 39 of IPC defined term 
voluntarily  a  person  is  said  to  cause  an  effect  voluntarily  when  he  causes  it  by  means  whereby  he 
intended to cause it or by means which at the time of employing those means he knows or had reason to 
believe to be likely to cause it. 

Intention and Motive 

The motive works as the fuel for the intent. The motive is the reason why someone is going to do 
something. It is the fountain from which the Actions, spring whereas intent is the goal to which they are 
directed.  Intention  means  the  purpose  of  doing  something  motive  determines  the  reason  for 
committing  an  Act.  The  intention  is  the  basic element  for  making  a  person  liable  for  a  crime  which  is 
commonly contrasted with motive.  The intention is the product of motive in fAct motive is not a legal 
element  of  a  crime.  Motive  plays  a  significant  role  because  without  an  understanding  of  why  people 
commit certain crimes in the way they do we are left to begin at whether they have done with a good 
motive or bad.  

Knowledge as Mens rea  

Knowledge  is  the  awareness  of  the  consequences  of  the  Act.  The  term  Knowledge  is  used 
in Section 307 (attempt to murder) instead of mens rea The knowledge and intention are on the same 
footing with a guilty mind Therefore knowledge is also component which includes mens rea. Therefore 
the Indian Penal Code recognizes Mens rea as knowledge. 

Om Prakash vs Punjab  

Defendant does not give the food to his wife for several weeks and he is now liable for murder 

because Act must be done with intent or knowledge of the scarcity of food.  

Negligence as Mens rea  

The third form of mens rea is negligence. Negligence is the duty to take care of. In other words, a 
person when he is negligent if he fails to exercise the duty or caution while performing a lawful Act The 
concept of reasonable negligence is not defined anywhere. Test of reasonable care depends on the view 
of the prudent man therefore who is able to fail to take care of reasonable care and if his Actions cause 

Page 19 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

harm anyone it is called the negligent Actions of a person this negligent Act is considered as a mens rea 
for criminal liability of a person.  

Vicarious Liability  

According to the principle of vicarious liability when a person is liable for the wrongful acts done 
by  another  person,  then  that  first  person  is  known  as  vicariously  liable  for  the  actions  of  the  second 
person. Here the relationship between the two of them is a must.  
There should be some relationship between A and B then only the liability of A will can arise towards B 
for doing some Act. 

The relationship can be in the form of: 
(a)  Principal and agent. 
(b)  Partners of the partnership firm. 
(c)  Masters and servant. 

The  principal  is  liable committed  by  his  agent  during  the  course  of  employment.  The  plaintiff  has  the 
choice to sue the principal or agent or both of them.   

The exception to General Rule of Vicarious Liability  

A person who does any wrongful Act through another person(servant/agent) by hiring them and 

hired person does that wrongful Act in the course of employment. 

There are two Latin maxim in which Vicarious Liability evolve out: 
Respondent superior: Let the master be liable. 
Qui facit per alium facit per se: Master will be liable for the work of his servant. 

Criminal Liability 

In our society, a crime often takes place which are against the principle of humanity. A person 

convicted for a crime has a certain criminal liability. The general principles i.e. Actus reus and Mens rea, 
play significant role in deciding criminal liability. 

Crime 
           There  are  lots  of  evils  in  our  society,  one  among  them  is  crime.  There  is  no  universal  accepted 
definition of crime, however certain acts of an individual or group of people, which harm the people or 
disturb peace and tranquility of the society can be termed as crimes. The person, who commits a crime, 
is punished as per law, so that such activities do not repeat in future. In general, following acts can be 
considered  as  a  crime  like  attack  on  public  order,  abuses  or  obstructions  of  public  property,  causing 
injuries  to  public,  attacking  individuals  and  annexing  their  rights,  attack  upon  the  property  of 
individuals, 
etc. 
rights 
            Thus, crime can be of dual nature i.e. civil or criminal. Sometimes, a crime in one country may not 
be crime in any other country, as crime is decided by the statute of the nation. According to sociologist, 
a crime can be against human body, property, public place, religion, and family, morals of society and 
society. 
conservation 

associated 

resources 

upon 

with, 

or 

of 

of 

Definitions of Crime 

According  to Sir  William  Blackstone,  "Crime  is  an  act  committed  or  omitted  in  Violation  of 

public law forbidding or commanding it." 

According to Sergeant Stephen, "A crime is a violation of right, considered in reference to the 

civil tendency of violation as regards the community." 

According  to John  Gillin,  "An  act  that  has  shown  to  be  actually  harmful  to  Society  or  that  is 
believed to be socially harmful by a group of people that has the power to enforce its beliefs, and that 
places such an act under the ban of positive penalties." 

Page 20 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

of 

the 

leaving 

According to Prof. SW Keeton, "A crime today would seem to be any undesirable act, which the 
State  finds  most  convenient  to  correct  by  the  institution  of  proceeding  for  the  infliction  of  a  penalty, 
person." 
the 
instead 
              According to Section 40 of the IPC, "An offence denotes a thing made punishable by the code." 
According  to Halsbury's  Law  of  England,  "A  crime  is  an  unlawful  act  or  default  which  is  an 
offence against the public and renders the person guilty of the act or default liable to legal punishment." 
According  to BA  Wrotley,  "A  crime  is  an  offence  against  the  law,  and  is  usually  an  offence 
against  morality,  against  a  man's  social  duty  to  his  fellow  being  members  of  society;  it  renders  the 
offender liable to punishment." 

discretion 

remedy 

injured 

some 

to 

of 

Criminal Liability 

When  a  person  do  or  perform  certain  act,  there  can  be  positive,  negative  or  neutral 
consequences. A person is liable for consequences of his/her act. In law, criminal liability can be defined 
as a liability or responsibility of a person, for a crime when he or she has acted with criminal intent, as 
opposed 
deliberately. 
If liability is proven in court, then one will be sentenced accordingly. In deciding criminal liability, the 
actus reus and the mens rea play a chief role. 

accidentally 

lacking 

ability 

acting 

the 

act 

or 

to 

to 

General Principles of Criminal Liability 

There  are  two  general  principles  of  criminal  liability  i.e.  Actus  reus  and  Mens  rea. 

These are discussed below: 
Actus Reus 

Actus reus is the first general principle of criminal liability. It is a Latin term, which means 'guilty 
act'. It is also referred as the external element or the objective element of a crime. According to statute, 
it refers to the act or omission that comprises the physical elements of a crime. 

In  his  criminal  law,  Glanville  Williams  stated  that  "actus  reus  includes  all  the  external 

circumstances and consequences specified in the rule of law as constituting the forbidden situation." 

Therefore,  we  can  say  that  it  include  everything  except  mental  element.  It  consists  of  both 

positive and negative elements. 

The characteristics and constituents of actus reus are decided by the criminal law of the country, 
that's  why  they  vary  from  one  country  to  another.  Definition  of  crime,  as  adopted  by  the  law  plays  a 
reus. 
very 

requirement 

significant 

deciding 

actus 

role 

in 

of 

Principle of Actus Reus in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 

Offences related with the principle of actus reus, in the Indian Penal Code are as follows: 
Place: Section 441 to 462 of the IPC, deals with the various offences related with places, which 
include  criminal  trespass,  house  trespass  and  breaking,  dishonestly  breaking  open  respectable 
containing property, etc 

Time: Section 456 to 458 of the IPC contains offences of lurking trespass or house-breaking by 
night in order to commit an offence. Such offence fall in category of actus reus in respect of both place 
and time. 

Person: Section 359 to 374 of the IPC contains offences of kidnapping and abduction, procuring 

of minor girls etc, such offence is actus reus in respect of the person. 

Consent:  The  offences  which  take  place  without  consent  are  also  included  in  actus  reus. 

Example of such offences is rape, non-consensual penetration, etc. 

Possession: Possession of stolen property constitute the actus reus (Section 410 to 412 of IPC) 
and  mere  possession  of  certain  things  amount  to  actus  reus  of  the  offence  under  Section  233  to  235, 
257, 242, 243, 259 and 266 of IPC. 

Preparation: Actus reus also includes preparation to commit an offence under Section 122, 126 

and 399 of IPC. 

Page 21 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Mens Rea 

Mens  rea  is  another  general  principle  of  the  criminal  liability.  It  is  a  Latin  word  which  means 
'guilty mind', just opposite of actus reus. In Laymen language, it can be defined as a mental element of a 
person's intention to commit a crime. Mental condition is one of the basic ingredients for committing a 
crime. Therefore, we can say that mens rea is motive force behind the criminal act. The degree of mens 
rea varies from one crime to another. In the cases of murder, forcible sexual assault, stealing property, 
homicide, etc, there was intention in the mind of culprit to commit these offences. 

The  doctrine  of  mens  rea  is  based  on  the  latin  maxim  actus  non  facit  reum  nisi  mens  sit  rea, 
which means 'the act does not make one guilty unless the mind is also guilty'. According to this maxim, 
physical  action  is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  a  crime.  Moreover,  propounder  of  mens  rea  has 
acknowledged that every person has the capacity to choose between right and wrong. An Individual can 
utilize  his  wisdom  and  prudence  to  choose  the  right  direction.  After  making  choice,  he  has  to  take 
responsibility for the same. Human beings are born free and they have freedom to act freely. 

Principle of Mens Rea in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 

The  Indian  Penal  Code  does  not  explicitly  mention  offences  related  with  the  principle  of  mens 
rea.  However,  there  are  certain  words  used  in  different  offences  which  indicate  element  of  mens  rea. 
These words are wrongful gain or wrongful loss, dishonestly, fraudulently, reason to believe, criminal 
knowledge  or  intention,  intentional  cooperation,  voluntarily,  malignantly,  wantonly,  maliciously,  etc. 
The  general  exceptions  embodied  in  the  Chapter  IV  of  the  IPC  include  acts  which,  otherwise  would 
constitute an offence, ceases to be so under certain circumstances set out in this chapter. 

Types of Criminal Liability 
Criminal  liability  can  be  categorized  into  three  types  i.e.  individual,  group  and  constructive  liability, 
which are as follows: 

Individual Criminal Liability 

An offence or unlawful activity can be committed by an individual or group of individuals. When 

an individual commit a crime, he/she is responsible for criminal liability of a committed crime. 

For  example,  there  are  four  friends  A,  B,  C  and  D.  They  live  in  a  same  flat,  and  study  in  same 
college.  One  day,  A  beats  D  because  of  some  issue  between  them.  In  this  case,  A  will  be  liable  for 
unlawful  act,  B  and  C  will  not  have  any  liability.  Hence,  case  of  A  is  perfect  example  of  an  individual 
criminal liability. 

Group Criminal Liability or Joint Liability 

Group criminal liability is just contradictory to individual criminal liability. In crimes, where two 
or  more  people  are  involved  in  the  commission  of  crime,  in  such  cases  all  the  people  are  liable  for 
committing  a  crime.  In  group  liability,  along  with  direct  participant,  indirect  participants  are  also 
caught, though punishment in crime, committed by group, can be same for all or different based on their 
role in the crime. 

Most of the planned or organized crimes come under the category of group criminal liability. In 
the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860,  provisions  regarding  group  liability  have  been  covered  under  joint 
liability. Section 34 to 38 of the IPC, 1860, embodies the principle of joint liability in committing crime. 

Acts Done by Several Persons in Furtherance of Common Intention (Section 34) 

When  a  criminal  act  is  done  by  several  persons  in  furtherance  of  the  common  intention  of  all, 
each  of  such  persons  is  liable  for  that  act  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  were  done  by  him  alone. 

Section 35 of the Act 

Page 22 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

This  section  covers  'An  act  which  is  criminal  by  reason  of  its  being  done  with  a  criminal 

knowledge or intention'. 

As  per  the  provisions  of  this  section,  whenever  an  act,  which  is  criminal  only  by  reason  of  its 
being  done  with  a  criminal  knowledge  or  intention,  is  done  by  several  persons,  each  of  such  persons 
who joins in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the 
intention. 
act 

knowledge 

alone 

were 

done 

with 

that 

him 

by 

or 

Effect Caused Partly by Act and Partly by Omission (Section 36) 
Wherever the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an omission, 
is  an  offence,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  causing  of  that  effect  partly  by  an  act  and  partly  by  an 
omission is the same offence. 

For  example,  A  intentionally  causes  Z's  death,  partly  by  illegally  omitting  to  give  Z  food,  and 

partly by beating Z. A has committed murder. 

Co-operation by Doing One of Several Acts Constituting an Offence (Section 37) 

When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally co-operates in the 
commission of that offence by doing anyone of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, 
commits that offence. 

For  example,  A  and  B  agree  to  murder  Z  by  severally  and  at  different  times  giving  him  small 
doses of poison. A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z 
dies from the effects of the several doses of poison, so administered to him. Here, A and B intentionally 
co-operate in the commission of murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is caused, 
separate. 
offence 
they 

though 

guilty 

their 

both 

acts 

are 

are 

the 

of 

Persons Concerned in Criminal Act may be Guilty of Different Offences (Section 38) 

Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may 

be guilty of different offences by means of that act. 

For  example,  A  attacks  Z  under  such  circumstances  of  grave  provocation  that  his  killing  of  Z 
would only be culpable homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to 
kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. 

Here, though A and B are both engaged in causing Z's death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty 

only of culpable homicide. 

Constructive Liability 
Constructive  liability  is  quite  similar  to  the  group  or  joint  liability.  It  is  based  on  the  principle  that  a 
person  is  liable,  in  law,  for  the  consequences  of  an  act  of  another,  even  though  he  has  not  done  it 
himself.  Many  times,  it  has  been  found  that  a  person  who  committed  crime  was  just  an  instrument, 
while  actual  and  principal  offender  was  another  person.  A  case  of  an  abetment  is  perfect  example  of 
constructive liability. 

In Alauddin  Mian  v.  State  of  Bihar case,  explaining  the  importance  of  Section  149  of  the  Indian 
Penal Code, the Supreme Court has observed that this section creates constructive liability and makes 
every member of the  unlawful assembly, liable for the  offence or offences committed in the course of 
the occurrence, provided that the same was/were committed in prosecution of the common object or 
was/were such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed. 

In Rama  Pasi  and  Another  v.  State  of  U.P. case,  court  held  that  Section  149  prescribes  for 
vicarious or constructive criminal liability for all members of an unlawful assembly, where an offence is 
committed by any member of such an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that 
assembly or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of 
that object. 

Moreover, a person may be constructively liable for an offence under following sections of IPC  

Under Section 34, Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention. 

Page 23 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Under Section 121A, being a member of a conspiracy to commit such an offence. 
Under  Section  141,  being  a  member  of  an  unlawful  assembly,  the  members  whereof  knew  that  an 
offence was likely to be committed. It include to resist the execution of any law, or of any legal progress, 
to overawe by criminal forces, or show of criminal force, to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, to 
take any person or property in possession and to compel any person to do what he is not legally bound 
to do. 

Stages of Crime 

are 

four 

there 

Committing a crime is a full-fledged process consisting of several stages, though there are some 
exceptions  to  it,  when  some  criminal  activities  take  place  immediately  on  a  spot.  In  premeditated 
crimes, 
follows: 
Intention. 
          It is the first stage in the commission of a crime; it is also referred as the mental and psycho stage. 
In this stage, person (offender) decides that he has to do some criminal act. Moreover, offender decides 
the  motive  and  chalks  out  plan  for  committing  a  crime.  Many  intellectuals  name  this  stage  as 
contemplation stage. No law in world, contain any provision for punishing a person who has generated 
intention for doing some criminal act, as it is mental concept, which cannot be proved in court. 

distinct 

stages 

which 

are 

as 

Preparation 
            After intention, stage of preparation comes, which plays an instrumental role in the commission 
of  a  crime.  In  this  stage,  an  offender  arranges  the  necessary  resources  for  the  execution  of  the 
intentional criminal act. 

For  example,  if  a  person  wants  to  kill  another  person,  because  of  any  reason,  in  preparatory 
stage, that person can make arrangement for weapon, hire people or any other thing depending on his 
capacity. 

Usually, a preparation to commit a crime is not punishable, however in certain cases, it can be 
punishable,  such  as  preparation  to  wage  war  against  the  government  (Section  122),  against  friendly 
(Section  399). 
foreign 

robbery  or  dacoity 

(Section  126) 

country 

commit 

and 

to 

Attempt 
Attempt is the third stage in the commission of crime. It is first explicit stage for committing crime. It 
can be defined as a direct movement towards the execution of a crime after the stage of intention and 
preparation. 

According  to  Sir  Stephen,  an  attempt  to  commit  a  crime  is  an  act  termed  with  intention  to 
commit  it  and  forming  part  of  a  series  of  acts  which  could  constitute  the  offence,  if  it  were  not 
interrupted. 

An attempt to crime has been covered in the IPC, in three different ways: 

In some cases, punishment for completed offence and their attempt is same, has been provided 
under Section 121, 124, 124(A), 125, 130, 131, 152, 153(A), 161, 162, 163, 165, 196, 198, 200, 213, 239, 
240, 
460. 
337, 
             In  many  cases,  different  punishments  have  been  provided  for  the  completed  offence  and  its 
attempt.  Such 
cases  are  under  Section  302,  304,  307,  308,  392,  393  and  309. 
Rest of the cases is covered under Section 511. 

241, 

335, 

251, 

391, 

398 

and 

Accomplishment(उपलि(cid:7011)ध
उपलि(cid:7011)ध) 
उपलि(cid:7011)ध
उपलि(cid:7011)ध
                It is the last stage in the commission of crime. This stage is considered to be taken place, when 
an  offender  is  successful  in  committing  his/her  intention.  Depending  on  the  situation,  if  offence  is 
completed, then person will become guilty and if unsuccessful, he will be guilty of his attempt. 

Page 24 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

अिवकिसत) Crime 
Inchoate(अिवकिसत
अिवकिसत
अिवकिसत

Crimes are of different types, one among them is inchoate crime. These are also called by names 
such  as  preliminary  crime,  inchoate  offence  and  incomplete  crimes.  It  can  be  defined  as  an  act  or 
omission  taken  towards  committing  a  crime  or  acts  that  constitute  indirect  participation  in  a  crime. 
Earlier  inchoate  crime  was  considered  as  a  minor  crime,  but  now  it  is  considered  as  a  serious  crime. 
There are actions which may not be a crime in and off itself, however actions may act as a purpose of 
crime. 
furthering 

advancing 

or 

a 

Types of Inchoate Crime 

Inchoate  crime  is  categorized  into  three  types  viz.  abetment,  criminal  conspiracy  and  attempt, 

which are discussed below: 

बहकाव) 
Abetment(बहकाव
बहकाव
बहकाव
               In  simple  words,  abet  means  to  encourage  or  assist  to  do  something  wrong,  especially  in  the 
context of committing a crime. Abetment includes help, co-activity and support within its ambit. Many 
times, a person does not want to do certain criminal acts, however under the influence or abetment by 
another person, that person can commit crime. 

In  the  case  of Sanju  v.  State  of  Madhya  Pradesh,  the  honorable  Supreme  Court  defined abet as 
meaning  to  aid,  to  assist  or  to  give  aid,  to  command,  to  procure,  or  to  Counsel,  to  countenance,  to 
encourage or to set another one to commit. 

Generally, a person who has committed it is liable for it, but principle of abetment emphasizes 
that one who helped criminal or provided him assistance, can also be held liable. Provisions Related to 
Abetment in the IPC, 1860.  

Following 

sections 

of 

the 

IPC 

are 

related 

with 

the 

abetment. 

Abetment of a Thing (Section 107) 

A person abets the doing of a thing, who: 

instigates  any  person  to  do  that  thing,  or  engages  with  one  or  more  other  persons  in  any 
conspiracy  for  the  doing  of  that  thing,  if  an  act  or  illegal  omission  takes  place  in  pursuance  of  that 
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing, or intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, 
the doing of that thing. 

For example: A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant, from a Courts of Justice to apprehend 
Z.  B  knowing  that  facts  and  also  that  C  is  not,  Z,  wilfully  represents  to  A  that  C  is  Z,  and  thereby, 
intentionally causes A to apprehend C. Here, B abets by instigation the apprehension of C. 

Abettor (Section 108) 

A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the commission of 
an  act  which  would  be  an  offence,  if  committed  by  a  person  capable  by  law  of  committing  an  offence 
with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor. To constitute the offence of abetment, it is 
not  necessary  that  the  act  abetted  should  be  committed,  or  that  the  effect  requisite  to  constitute  the 
caused. 
offence 
             For example, A instigates B to murder  C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit 
murder. 

should 

be 

It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law of committing an offence, or 
that  he  should  have  the  same  guilty  intention  or  knowledge  as  that  of  the  abettor,  or  any  guilty 
intention or knowledge. 

                  For example, A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to commit an act which would 

Page 25 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence, and having the same 
intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is guilty of abetting an offence. 

Section 109 of the Act 

This section deals with 'Punishment of abetment, if the act abetted is committed in consequence 
and  where  no  express  provision  is  made  for  its  punishment'.  As  per  the  provisions  of  this  section, 
whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, and no 
express  provision  is  made  by  this  code  for  the  punishment  of  such  abetment,  be  punished  with  the 
punishment 
offence. 
For  example,  A  instigates  B  to  give  false  evidence.  B,  in  consequence  of  the  instigation,  commits  that 
offence. A is guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B. 

provided 

the 

for 

Section 110 of the Act 

This  section  deals  with  'Punishment  of  abetment,  if  person  abetted  does  act  with  different 
intention from that of abettor'. As per the provisions of this section, whoever abets the commission of 
an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act with a different intention or knowledge from that of 
the  abettor,  be  punished  with  the  punishment  provided  for  the  offence  which  would  have  been 
committed, if the act had been done with the intention or knowledge of the abettor and with no other. 

Liability of Abettor when One Act Abetted and Different Act Done (Section 111) 

When  an  act  is abetted  and  a  different  act  is done,  the  abettor  is  liable  for  the  act  done,  in  the 
same  manner  and  to  the  same  extent  as  if  he  had  directly  abetted  it.  Provided  the  act  done  was  a 
probable  consequence  of  the  abetment,  and  was  committed  under  the  influence  of  the  instigation,  or 
the  abetment. 
with 
              For  example,  A  instigates  B  to  burn  Z's  house.  B  sets  fire  to  the  house  and  at  the  same  time 
commits theft of property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is  not  guilty  of 
abetting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence of the burning. 

in  pursuance  of 

conspiracy  which 

the  aid  or 

constituted 

the 

Abettor when Liable to Cumulative Punishment for Act Abetted and for Act Done (Section 112) 

                        If  the  act  for  which  the  abettor  is  liable  under  the  last  preceding  section  is  committed  in 
addition  to  the  act  abetted,  and  constitutes  a  distinct  offence,  the  abettor  is  liable  to  punishment  for 
each of the offences. 

                         For  example,  A  instigates  B  to  resist  by  force  a  distress  made  by  a  public  servant.  B,  in 
consequence, resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the 
officer  executing  the  distress.  As  B  has  committed  both  the  offence  of  resisting  the  distress,  and  the 
offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and if A 
knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress. A will also be liable to 
offences. 
punishment 

each 

the 

for 

of 

Section 113 of the Act 

This section deals with 'Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different from 
that  Intended  by  the  abettor'.  As  per  the  provisions  of  this  section,  when  an  act  is  abetted  with  the 
intention  on  the  part  of  the  abettor  of  causing  g  particular  effect,  and  an  act  for  which  the  abettor  is 
liable in consequence of the abetment, causes a different effect from that intended by the abettor, the 
abettor is liable for the effect caused, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had abetted the 
act with the intention of causing that effect provided, he knew that the act abetted was likely to cause 
that effect. 

Page 26 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

For  example,  A  instigates  B  to  cause  grievous  hurt  to  Z.  B,  in  consequence  of  the  instigation, 
causes  grievous  hurt  to  Z,  Z  dies  in  consequence.  Here,  if  A  knew  that  the  grievous  hurt  abetted  was 
likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the punishment provided for murder. 

Abettor Present When Offence is Committed (Section 114) 

Whenever  any  person  who  if  absent  would  be  liable  to  be  punished  as  an  abettor,  is  present 
when  the  act  or  offence  for  which  he  would  be  punishable  in  consequence  of  the  abetment  is 
offence. 
committed, 

committed 

deemed 

have 

shall 

such 

act 

he 

be 

or 

to 

Section 115 of the Act 

This section deals with 'Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, if 
offence  is  not  committed'.  As  per  the  provisions  of  this  section,  whoever  abets  the  commission  of  an 
offence  punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for  life,  shall,  if  that  offence  be  not  committed  in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such 
abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, 
fine. 
           If  act  causing  harm  be  done  in  consequence,  and  if  any  act  for  which  the  abettor  is  liable  in 
consequence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to 
imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  fourteen  years,  and  shall  also  be 
liable to fine. 

liable 

shall 

also 

and 

be 

to 

For example, A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he 
would have been subject to the punishment of death or imprisonment for life. Therefore, A is liable to 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and if any hurt be done to 
Z  in  consequence  of  the  abetment,  he  will  be  liable  to  imprisonment  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to 
fine. 
fourteen 

years, 

and 

to 

Section 116 of the Act 

This  section  deals  with Abetment  of  offence  punishable  with  imprisonment,  if  offence  be  not 
committed.  As  per  the  provisions  of  this  section,  whoever  abets  an  offence  punishable  with 
imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express 
provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of 
any description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest 
term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both. 

For example, A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour in the 

exercise of B's official functions. B refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section. 

Abetting Commission of Offence by the Public or by more than Ten Persons (Section 117) 

Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of 
persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 

For example, A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten 
members to meet at a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse 
sect, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 

Concealing Design to Commit Offence Punishable with Death or Imprisonment for Life (Section 
118) 

Whoever  intending  to  facilitate  or  knowing  it  to  be  likely  that  he  will  thereby  facilitate  the 
commission of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, voluntarily conceals, by any 
act  or  illegal  omission,  the  existence  of  a  design  to  commit  such  offence  or  makes  any  representation 
which  he  knows  to  be  false  respecting  such  design,  if  offence  is  committed,  be  punished  with 

Page 27 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or, if the offence is not 
committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to three years, and in 
either case shall also be liable to fine. 

For  example,  A,  knowing  that  dacoity  is  about  to  be  committed  at  B,  falsely  informs  the 
Magistrate  that  a  dacoity  is  about  to  be  committed  at  C,  a  place  in  an  opposite  direction  and  thereby 
misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity is committed 
section. 
at 

punishable 

pursuance 

design. 

under 

this 

the 

in 

of 

is 

A 

B 

Concealing Design to Commit Offence Punishable with Imprisonment (Section 120) 
Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission 
of  an  offence  punishable  with  imprisonment,  voluntarily  conceals,  by  any  act  or  illegal  omission,  the 
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false 
respecting  such  design,  shall  if  the  offence  is  committed,  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  the 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth, and, if the offence is 
not committed, to one-eighth, of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided 
for the offence, or with both. 

Criminal Conspiracy 
A  criminal  conspiracy  is  a  common  inchoate  crime.  It  can  be  defined  as  a  secret  pact  or  agreement 
between  two  or  more  people  to  commit  an  unlawful  act  or  to  accomplish  a  lawful  end  by  unlawful 
means. According to criminal law, a person can be convicted for planning a conspiracy even if the actual 
crime was never committed. 

For example, A is enemy of businessman B, A plans to kill B, A buys weapon and start following 
person  B  to  find  right  moment  to  kill  him.  A  can  be  charged  with  conspiracy  to  commit  murder  of  B, 
completed. 
itself 
regardless 
             In order to punish a person for criminal conspiracy, there should be sufficient evidence to show 
crime. 
that 

two  people  were 

two  or  more 

of  whether 

agreement 

attempted 

commit 

killing 

than 

ever 

the 

or 

to 

in 

is 

a 

Provisions related to Criminal Conspiracy in the IPC, 1860 

Following 

sections 

of 

the 

IPC 

are 

related  with 

the 

criminal 

conspiracy 

Definition of Criminal Conspiracy (Section 120A) 

When 

two 

or  more 

persons 

agree 

to 

do, 

or 

cause 

to 

be 

done: 

a.  an illegal act, or 
b.  an  act  which  is  not  illegal  by  illegal  means,  such  an  agreement  is  designated  a  criminal 

conspiracy. 

Provided  that  no  agreement  except  an  agreement  to  commit  an  offence  shall  amount  to  a  criminal 
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in 
pursuance thereof. 

Punishment of Criminal Conspiracy (Section 120B) 

Whoever  is  a  party  to  a  criminal  conspiracy  to  commit  an  offence  punishable  with  death, 
imprisonment  for  life  or  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  two  years  or  upwards,  shall,  where  no 
express provision is made in this code for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same 
(1)] 
manner 

[Section 

offence. 

abetted 

120B 

such 

had 

he 

as 

if 

Whoever  is  a  party  to  a  criminal  conspiracy  other  than  a  criminal  conspiracy  to  commit  an  offence 
punishable  as  aforesaid  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  not 
(2)] 
exceeding 

six  months, 

or  with 

or  with 

[Section 

120B 

both. 

fine 

Page 28 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Attempt 
               The  Supreme  Court,  in Koppula  Venkat  Rao  v.  State  of  Andhra  Pradesh,  observed  that: 
"The  word  'attempt'  is  not  itself  defined,  and  must,  therefore,  be  taken  in  its  ordinary  meaning.  An 
attempt to commit an offence is an act, or a series of acts, which leads inevitably to the commission of 
the  offence,  unless  something,  which  the  doer  of  the  act  neither  foresaw  nor  intended,  happens  to 
prevent  this.  An  attempt  may  be  described  to  be  an  act  done  in  part-execution  of  a  criminal  design, 
amounting  to  more  than  mere  preparation,  but  failing  short  of  actual  consummation,  and  possessing, 
except for failure to consummate, all the elements of the substantive crime". 

There are some tests upheld by courts of India for distinguishing attempt to commit an offence 
from  the  stage  of  preparations.  A  few  of  them  are  the  Proximity  Rule,  Doctrine  of  Locus  Poenitentiae 
and the Equivocally Test. 
Provisions 

to 

Attempt 
are 

in 
related 

the 
with 

IPC, 
the 

1860 
attempt 

related 
of 

the 

IPC 

Following 

sections 

Section 511 of the Act 

This  section  deals  with  'Punishment  for  attempting  to  commit  offences  punishable  with 

imprisonment for life or other imprisonment'. 

As per the provisions of this section, whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this 
Code with imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in 
such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is 
made  by  this  Code  for  the  punishment  of  such  attempt,  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  any 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment for 
life or, as the case  may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided  for that offence, or 
with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 

Section 121 of the Act 
This  section  deals  with  "Waging,  or  attempting  to  wage  war,  or  abetting  waging  of  war,  against  the 
government of India". 

As per the provisions of this section, whoever wages wa; against the (Government of India), or 
attempts  to  wage  such  war,  or  abets  the  waging  of  such  war,  shall  be  punisheq  with  death,  or 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 

Waging War Against any Asiatic Power in Alliance with the Government of India (Section 125) 

Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace with the 
Government of India or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished 
with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 

Abetting Mutiny, or Attempting to Seduce a Soldier, Sailor or Airman from his Duty (Section 131) 
Whoever  abets  the  committing  of  mutiny  by  an  officer,  soldier,  sailor  or  airman  in  the  Army, 
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India or attempts to seduce any such officer, soldier, sailor or 
airman  from  his  allegiance  or  his  duty,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  life  or  with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 10 years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 

Attempt to Murder (Section 307) 

Whoever does any act with such intention of knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if 
he  by  that  act  caused  death,  he  would  be  guilty  of  murder,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of 
either description for a term which may extend to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is 

Page 29 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life or to such 
mentioned. 
punishment 

hereinbefore 

as 

is 

Attempt to Commit Culpable Homicide (Section 308) 

Whoever does any act  with such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that, if 
he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 

Attempt to Commit Robbery (Section 393) 

Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 

which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 

1.3 Theories and Kinds of Punishment (Includes IPC Chapter III: Sections 53 to 75) 
Theories of punishment 

Punishment.  A  term  which  is  inherent  to  criminal  justice.  It  is  only  because  of  the  term 
punishment, that certain acts are classified as ‘crimes’. Down the lane of the history of the society, we 
have seen that without punishments, it would have sometimes been impossible to tame the barbaric, as 
well as primitive tendencies of the public. It was the weapon named ‘punishment’, that the rulers used 
against their subjects in order to maintain a fear in the minds of the public regarding the capacities and 
powers of their rulers. Punishments sometimes were also given as an insult to someone else. However, 
the most common punishment from which all of us are familiar is the scolding or mild beating that we 
get  from  our  parents.  In  that  case,  what  are  the  theories  of  punishment  actually  in  case  of  serious 
crimes? How did they develop? What are the pros and cons of the various ways of punishing people? Do 
the  Hindu  scriptures  too  depict  any  form  of  the  punishments  mentioned  hereinafter?  Through  this 
paper,  we  will  try  to  answer  all  such  questions  and  understand  how  far  are  the  various  Theories  of 
Punishment applicable in the present era. The theories of punishment are as follows: 

• RETRIBUTIVE THEORY. 
• DETERRENT THEORY. 
• PREVENTIVE THEORY. 
• INCAPACITATION THEORY. 
• COMPENSATORY THEORY. 
• REFORMATIVE THEORY.  
• UTILITIRIAN THEORY.  

Let us have a look at each one of them in detail. 

Retributive Theory of punishment 

The  Retributive  Theory  of  Punishment,  or  the  ‘Theory  of  Vengeance’,  as  many  people  in  the 
society  would  perceive  it  as,  is  the  most  basic,  yet  inconsiderate  theory  of  inflicting  a  penal  sentence 
over  a  perpetrator.  It  is  based  on  a  very  small  doctrine,  namely  the  doctrine  of Lex talionis, which  if 
translated, means ‘an eye for an eye’. Now, if looked at from the perspective of very serious and heinous 
offences,  like  the  Delhi  gang  rape  case,  people  may  feel  that  it  is  better  to  inflict  such  retributive 
punishments, so as to ensure that a deterrent is set across the society, in order to prevent such crimes 
in the near future. 

However,  we  forget  to  understand  sometimes  that  always  having  a  retributive  approach  will 
render  the  society  one  with  a  primitive  system  of  justice,  where  the  Kings  or  the  Judges  were 
considered  to  be  the  supreme  beings  and  were  provided  with  the  stature  of  God  Himself  (hence  the 
address My Lord) and thus, collapse the very concepts of the representatives being ‘servants’. Before we 
move  on  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  Retributive  Theory,  we  need  to  understand  two  very 
important doctrines. Let us have a look at them both. 

Page 30 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Doctrine of Societal Personification and the Doctrine of Correctional Vengeance: 

• Doctrine of Societal Personification can be stated as- 

‘When a member of the society is subjected to a very heinous crime, as a result of which, the whole society, 
as if it were a natural person, considers the offence to be inflicted upon itself, comes to the defence of that 
person either by way of demanding justice or by conducting the same on its own, the society is said to be 
personified.’ 
A very self-explanatory doctrine. To be put simply, it means that the society, whenever a heinous crime 
of  an  extreme  form  is  committed,  assumes  the  form  of  a  natural  person  and  behaves  in  a  collective 
manner so as to get justice. 
Eg: The country-wide protests for the Delhi gang rape case, the current Hathras rape case, etc. 

• Doctrine of Correctional Vengeance maybe stated as- 

‘When the society, in a fit to get justice, demands the concerned authorities to inflict vengeful (as painful as 
the original act, or even more) punishments upon the victim for creating a deterrent, it is said to exhibit 
correctional vengeance.’  
The  above  definition,  too,  is  quite  self-explanatory  in  its  nature.  Now  that  we  have  understood  these 
two doctrines, we have a basic idea about what really is retributivism or retributive justice. Let us now 
have a closer look upon the same. 

Understanding Retributive Theory of Punishment: 
‘The concept of retributive justice has been used in a variety of ways, but it is best understood as that 
form of justice committed to the following three principles: 

1.  that  those  who  commit  certain  kinds  of  wrongful  acts,  paradigmatically  serious  crimes, 

morally deserve to suffer a proportionate punishment; 

2.  that  it  is  intrinsically  morally  good—good  without  reference  to  any  other  goods  that  might 

arise—if some legitimate punisher gives them the punishment they deserve; and 

3.  that  it  is  morally  impermissible  intentionally  to  punish  the  innocent  or  to  inflict 

disproportionately large punishments on wrongdoers.’ 

The  above  three  principles  clarify  the  needs  for  retributive  justice  even  further.  We  may  understand 
retributive justice in this manner. The place where both Criminal Law as well as Moral Law meet, is the 
place where mostly the retributive punishments are generated.  

In fact, although people may classify punishments into seven different types, but in reality, every 
punishment, indeed, is retributive in nature. It is very interesting to see that the damages claimed under 
Torts, or the remedies sort for environmental violations, maybe compensatory, but at their hearts, are 
retributive  in  nature.  Then  why  aren’t  they  labelled  as  retributive,  instead?  Well,  the  answer  to  the 
question is simple. Retributive punishments are somewhat vengeful in their nature (an eye for an eye). 
They may not be vengeful always, but maybe merely morally vengeful. When we say this, it means that 
although  the  punishment  is  not  literally  the  thing  that  was  originally  done  by  the  perpetrator,  is  still 
acts as a vengeance by virtue of its seriousness. 

E.g: If a person rapes someone, capital punishment maybe given as a retributive measure. If we 
literally give the person back what he did, i.e., sex, then it would be pleasurable rather than torturing for 
him.  Now  that  we  have  understood  briefly  that  how  exactly  the  retributive  punishment  works,  let  us 
now move on to understand the ways in which Retributive Theory is displayed in the Hindu texts and 
scriptures. 

Retributive Theory and the Hindu Scriptures: 

The  Hindu  scriptures,  particularly  the Ramayana, Mahabharata and  the Durga  Saptashati,  are 
primarily based on Retributive Theories but also, depict the ways in  which one should proceed while 
applying them. 

Page 31 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Ramayana- In  the Ramayana the  whole  story  began  from  retribution  itself. Lakshmana cut  the  nose 
of Raavan’s  sister,  because  of  which  he  kidnapped Sita.  In  order  to  rescue  her  and  also  to  avenge  her 
kidnapping, Ram went  to  kill Raavan.  But,  the  major  difference  between  the  application  of  the 
retributive punishment between the two was that Raavan did not even give Ram a chance to repent for 
his younger brother’s act, but, Ram gave several chances to Raavan to correct his act. 
Mahabharata– Mahabharata, once again, is a very good example of how retributive punishment should 
be  inflicted.  The Pandavas had  not  started-off  with  the  war  right  away.  They  had  sent Shri Krishna as 
their  messenger  of  peace  a  number  of  times  to  the Kauravas,  but,  they  did  not  give  in. Mahabharata, 
especially Shrimad Bhagvad Geeta, talks about the time when the retributive mode should be used. As 
we  all  know  that Arjun was  about  to  leave  the  battlefield  as  he  was  too  scared  to  go  against  his  own 
relatives, it was Krishna who said that ‘when all other paths close down, only then war is to be resorted 
to.  Because  if  then  the  person  refuses  to  fight,  then  it  will  inflict  gross  injustice  upon  the  society  at-
large.’ 
Durga Saptashati–  In  this  too,  Goddess Durga warns  the  various  demons,  i.e. Mahishasur and Shumbh-
Nishumbh, repeatedly, before starting a killer spree upon them. 
Now, let us move on to see some important case laws regarding this theory of punishment. 
Case Laws: 

1.  Nirbhaya Judgement– This case is indeed the first and foremost case to be mentioned, while 
talking about retributive justice in India. In this Judgement, the Supreme Court sentenced four 
out of six felons involved in the extremely heinous Delhi gang rape case to death, much to the 
delight  of  the  society,  as  they  had  committed  an  extremely  gruesome,  as  well  as  morally 
unimaginable crime. 

2.  Anwar Ahmad v/s. State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr.– In this case, the convicted had already 
undergone a six month imprisonment term, before being officially convicted by the Court. The 
Court held that since the convict had been convicted and also, the required ‘blemish’ had also 
been imposed upon him, it was not necessary to sentence him again in the name of ‘retributive 
punishment’, as it would inflict a very big loss upon the family as well. 

3.  Sri Ashim Dutta Alias Nilu vs State of West Bengal– In this case, it was observed that both 
deterrent and retributive punishment aim at prevention of the recurrences of the offences by 
others  passing  exemplary  punishment  for  a  particular  offence.  But  the  civilization  and  the 
societies  are  progressing  rapidly.  There  is  advancement  of  science  and  technology.  The 
literate  people  and  the  experts  in  different  branches  of  knowledge  started  thinking  in  a 
different  way.  Eye  for  an  eye,  and  tooth  for  a  tooth  are  no  more  considered  as  the  correct 
approach  towards  the  criminals.  Such  principle  may  perpetuate  the  rule  of  the  Jungle  but 
cannot ensure the rule of law. 

Pros and Cons: 
Pros- 

1.  Acts as a strong deterrent. 
2.  Helps in giving moral justice to the victim. 
3.  Instils the feeling of trust within the society, towards the judiciary. 

Cons- 

1.  Sometimes, may become disproportionate with the seriousness of the crime. 
2.  Society develops feelings of vengeance and destructive tendencies follow. 
3.  The State may become autocratic in its functioning, using the punishment to torment people.  

Deterrent Theory of punishment 

In Deterrent theory of punishment, the term “DETER” means to abstain from doing any wrongful 
act. The main aim of this theory is to “deter” (to prevent) the criminals from attempting any crime or 
repeating the same crime in future. So, it states that deterring crime by creating a fear is the objective; 
to set or establish an example for the individuals or the whole society by punishing the criminal. That 
simply  means,  according  to  this  theory  if  someone  commits  any  crime  and  he/she  is  punished  by  a 

Page 32 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

severe punishment, then, it may result maybe that the people of the society will be or may be aware of 
the severe punishments for certain kinds of crimes and because of this fear in the minds of the people of 
the  society,  the  people  may  stop  from  committing  any  kind  of  crime  or  wrongful  act.  Here  I  used  the 
phrase “may stop” instead  of “will stop”. That  means,  there  is  a  probability  of  committing  any  crime  or 
repeating the same crime.  

The deterrent theory of punishment is utilitarian in nature. For a better understanding we can 
say like, ‘The man is punished not only because he has done a wrongful act, but also in order to ensure 
the crime may not be committed.’ It is best expressed in the word of Burnett, J who said to a prisoner:  
“Thou art to be hanged not for having stolen a horse, but in order that other horses may not be stolen”.  

Through  making  the  potential  criminals  realize  that  it  doesn’t  pay  to  commit  a  crime,  the 

deterrent theory hopes to control the crime rate in the society. 

Jurisprudential School of Thought: 

The deterrent theory can be related to the sociological school of Jurisprudence. The sociological 
school creates a relationship between the society and law. It indicates law to be a social phenomenon, 
with a direct and/or indirect connection to society. One of the main aim of the deterrence is to establish 
an example for the individuals in the society by creating a fear of punishment. 

Now  most  important  question  is  arrived  at;  “Who  established  this  deterrent  theory  of 
punishment?” 

The  concept  of  deterrent  theory  can  be  simplifying  to  the  research  of  philosophers  such  like 
Thomas  Hobbes  (1588-1678),  Cesare  Beccaria  (1738-1794),  Jeremy  Bentham  (1748-1832).  These 
social contract thinkers provided the foundation of modern deterrence in criminology. 

In  the Hobbesian view, people  generally  pursue  their  self-interests,  such  as  material  gain, 
personal safety and social reputation and make enemies, not caring if they harm others in the process. 
Since  people  are  determined  to  achieve  their  self-interests,  the  result  is  often  conflict  and  resistance 
without a fitting Government to maintain safety. To avoid, people agree to give up their egocentricity as 
long as everyone does the same thing, approximately. This is termed as “Social Contract”. According to 
this  social  contract,  he  stated  that  individuals  are  punished  for  violating  the  social  contract  and 
deterrence is the reason for it to maintain the agreement between the State and the people, in the form 
of a social contract workable. 

According  to Cesare Beccaria, while  discussing  about  punishments,  the  proportion  of  the  crime 

and punishments should be equal for it to serve as a deterrence or have a deterring value.  

According to J. Bentham, who is known as the founder of this theory, a hedonistic conception of 
man and that man as such would be deterred from crime if punishment were applied swiftly, certainly, 
and severely. But being aware that punishment is an evil, he says, if the evil of punishment exceeds the 
evil of the offence, the punishment will be unprofitable; he would have purchased exemption from one 
evil at the expense of another.  

From  the  deterrent  theories  of  Thomas  Hobbes,  Cesare  Beccaria  and  J.  Bentham,  we  came  to 

know that the theory of deterrence consists of 3 major components. They are as follows: 

• Severity: It indicates the degree of punishment. To prevent crime, criminal law must emphasize 
penalties to encourage citizen to obey the law. Excessively severe punishments are unjust. If 
the  punishment  is  too  severe  it  may  stop  individuals  from  committing  any  crime.  And  if  the 
punishment is not severe enough, it will not deter criminals from committing a crime. 

• Certainty: It  means  making  sure  that  punishments  must  happen  whenever  a  criminal  act  is 
committed. Philosopher Beccaria believed that if individuals know that their undesirable acts 
will be punished, then they will refrain from offending in the future.  

• Celerity: The  punishment  for  any  crime  must  be  swift  in  order  to  deter  crime.  The  faster  the 

punishment is awarded and imposed, it has more effect to deter crime. 

Page 33 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Therefore, deterrence theorists believed that if punishment is severe, certain and swift, then a rational 
person  will  measure  the  gain  or  loss  before  committing  any  crime  and  as  a  result  the  person  will  be 
deterred or stopped from violating the law, if the loss is greater than the gain. 
According  to  Austin’s  theory,  “Law  is  the  command  of  the  Sovereign”.  In  his  imperative  theory,  he 
clearly declared three important things, which are as follows:  

1.  Sovereign. 
2.  Command. 
3.  Sanction. 

Austin’s  question  is  that  ‘Why  do  people  follow  the  rule?’.  He  believes  that  people  will  follow  the  law 
because people have a fear of punishments. On the basis of his beliefs, we can see a small example over 
here: When people are biking, they wear a helmet as per biking rules. Now, we can assume that some 
people  wear  helmets  genuinely  to  save  themselves  from  road  accidents  but  on  the  other  hand,  some 
people  wear  helmets  because  of  escaping  fines  or  in  fear  of  cancellation  of  their  biking  licence.  So,  in 
that case, they know that if they bike rashly or disobey the biking rules they will be punished by giving 
huge a amount of fine or their biking licence will be cancelled. So here we can say that the purpose of 
the deterrent theory is successful and applied also. 

Now,  if  we  go  back  a  little  earlier  in  time,  in  our Hindu Scriptures we  also  see  that  there  were 
several  punishments  like  public  hanging,  not  only  that  but  also  people  were  immersed  in  hot  oil  or 
water. Most penal systems made use of deterrent theory as the basis of sentencing mechanism till early 
19th century.  

• In England, punishments were more severe and barbaric in nature to restrict same crime in the 
future.  At  the  time  of  ‘Queen  Elizabeth  I’,  deterrent  theory  of  punishment  was  applied  for 
restricting future crimes, even for too little crimes like ‘pickpocketing’. 

• In India also, inhuman punishments are granted. 
But, if we discuss or follow this theory in today’s context, then, it will be very clear that “deterrent 
theory” is not applicable at all or it may not be useful enough to prevent or to deter crimes by creating a 
fear in the minds of people. We have a very recent example of why deterrent theory is not successful in 
the  case  of  “Nirbhaya  Rape  Case,  2012”.  This  case  is  the  foremost  case  to  be  mentioned  while  talking 
about deterrent theory of punishment. In this judgement, the Supreme Court sentenced four out of six 
offenders  involved  in  the  extremely  heinous  Delhi  gang  rape  case  to  death.  Now,  the  most  important 
questions are- 

• Whether the death sentence to the culprits will act as a deterrent?  
• Will the number of crimes against women in our society drop down permanently?  
• Specifically, in Nirbhaya judgement, is the aim of deterrent theory fulfilled?  

The answers are ‘no’. According to deterrent theory, the main objective is ‘to deter crime, by creating a 
fear  or  establishing  an  example  to  the  society.’  Now,  death  penalty  is  a  severe  punishment.  In  the 
Nirbhaya case, the Court gave death sentence to the four convicts for committing gang rape. We can say 
that  it  is  a  great  example  for  future  offenders  who  will  think  about  committing  a  crime  like  rape  in 
future.  So,  according  to  this  theory,  after  Nirbhaya  judgment  crimes  like  rape  should  not  happen. 
But they are happening till now. Day-by-day, rape cases are increasing in our society. 

In  Nirbhaya  gang  rape  judgement, it’s being  suggested  that  justice  has  finally  been  served  to 
“India’s Daughter” and though the decision came after a staggering seven years, it will help to secure the 
safety  of  women  and  prevent  rape  cases  in  the  future.  But  it  seems  to  further,  as  starting  of  the  year 
2020 has seen a slew of rape cases continue unabated. As an example, we can see for a recent gang rape 
case which was happened at Hathras, Balrampur, on 1st October 2020. So, simply we can see that there 
is  no  improvement  through  severe  punishments  also.  “Death  penalty  does  not  act  as  a  deter  to  rape 
cases”-  This  is  the  actual  message  we  have  understood.  So  that’s  why  we  can  say  that  in  today’s 
generation there is no major implication of ‘Deterrent Theory of Punishment’. 

Preventive Theory of punishment 

Page 34 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Preventive theory of punishment seeks to prevent prospective crimes by disabling the criminals. 
Main object of the preventive theory is transforming the criminal, either permanently or temporarily. 
Under this theory the criminals are punished by death sentence or life imprisonment etc.  

Philosophical View of Preventive Theory: 

Utilitarian’s  such  as  Bentham,  Mill  and  Austin  of  England  supported  the  preventive  theory  of 
punishment due to its humanizing nature. Philosophy of preventive theory affirms that the preventive 
theory serves as an effective deterrent and also a successful preventive theory depends on the factors of 
promptness.  The  profounder  of  this  theory  held  that  the  aim  of  punishment  is  to  prevent  the  crimes. 
The crimes can be prevented when the criminal and his notorious activities are checked. The check is 
possible  by  disablement.  The  disablement  may  be  of  different  types.  Confining  inside  the  prison  is  a 
limited form of disablement, that is temporary and when it is an unlimited form of disablement, that is 
permanent. It suggests that imprisonment is the best mode of crime prevention, as it seeks to eliminate 
offenders from society, thus disabling them from repeating the crime. The death penalty is also based 
on this theory. This theory is another form of deterrent theory. One is to deter the society while another 
is  to  prevent  the  offender  from  committing  the  crime. From  an  overall  study,  we  came  to  know  that 
there are three most important ways of preventive punishment, they are as follows:  

• By creating the fear of punishment. 
• By disabling the criminal permanently or temporarily from committing any other crime. 
• By way of reformation or making them a sober citizen of the society.  

Case Laws: 

1.  Dr.  Jacob  George  v  state  of  Kerala: In  this  case,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  aim  of 
punishment  should  be  deterrent,  reformative,  preventive,  retributive  &  compensatory.  One 
theory  preferred  over  the  other  is  not  a  sound  policy  of  punishment.  Each  theory  of 
punishment should be used independently or incorporated on the basis of merit of the case. It 
is  also  stated  that  “every  saint  has  a  past  &  every  sinner  has  a  fortune”.  Criminals  are  very 
much a part of the society so it is a responsibility of the society also to reform & correct them 
and make them sober citizens of the society. Because the prevention of crime is the major goal 
of the society and law, both of which cannot be ignored. 

2.  Surjit Singh v State of Punjab: In this case, one of the accused, a policeman entered the house 
of  the  deceased  with  the  intention  to  commit  rape  but  failed  to  do  so  as  the  as  sons  of  the 
deceased shouted for help. Another accused suggested the policeman to kill the deceased. The 
accused was held liable under section 450 of the Indian Penal Code. While on the contrary, the 
death penalty or capital punishment is more of a temporary form of disablement. 

Incapacitation Theory of punishment 
Meaning:  
The  word “incapacitation” means  ‘to  prevent  the  offence  by  punishing,  so  that  the  future  generation 
fears  to  commit  the  criminal  act.’  Incapacitation  happens  either  by  removing  the  person  from  the 
society,  either  temporarily,  or  permanently,  or  by  some  other  method,  which  restricts  him  due  to 
physical inability. One of the most common way of incapacitation is incarceration of the offenders, but 
in  case  of  severe  cases,  capital  punishments  are  also  applied.  The  overall  aim  of  incapacitation  is 
preventing or restraining the danger in the future. 
Definition:  
“Incapacitation refers to the restriction of an individual’s freedoms and liberties that they would normally 
have in society.”  
Purpose of Incapacitation Theory:  

One of the primary purposes of this theory is removing the sufficiently dangerous persons from 
the  society.  The  risk  that  is  found  to  be  posed  by  the  offenders  are  largely  a  matter  of  inception. 
Therefore, if one country treats one offence in one way, another country will treat the same offence in a 
different way. For example, in the U.S., they use incarceration to incapacitate offenders at a much higher 

Page 35 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

rate,  than  in  other  countries.  It  has  been  seen  that  unlike  the  other  theories  of  punishments  like 
deterrence,  rehabilitation  and  restitution,  the  theory  of  incapacitation  simply  rearranges  the 
distribution of offenders in the society so that the rate of crime decreases in the society. The main aim 
of  the  theory  of  incapacitation  is  to  dissuade  others  from  the  offenders  in  the  past,  so  that  it  is  not 
followed by the future generation.  

Application of the theory:  

The  theory  of  incapacitation  gets  reserved  only  for  those  people  who  are  either  sentenced  to 
prison  or  to  life  imprisonment.  Yet,  it  also  includes  things  like  being  supervised  by  the  departments 
within the community, like probation and parole. 

Origin:  

The  theory  of  incapacitation  was  originated  in  Britain,  during  the  18th and  the  19th centuries, 
where the convicted offenders were often transported to places like America and Australia. Later in the 
21st century,  the  theory  was  changed  to  some  extent,  where  the  offenders  were  to  remain  in  the 
primary  method  of  incapacitation  which  was  found  in  most  of  the  contemporary  penal  systems. 
Therefore,  the  theory  usually  takes  the  form  of  imprisonment,  which  is  considered  to  be  the  best  the 
form of incapacitation, rather than other methods of incapacitation. 
So, can incapacitation reduce crime? 

According to a study conducted by The University of Chicago, it has been proven that the crime 
rates  can  be  prevented  by  20  per  cent.  Also,  it  has  been  seen  that  if  other  theories  are  applied  like 
Retributive  Theory,  Compensatory  Theory,  etc.,  then  they  lay  down  a  fairly  stringent  application  of 
putting the criminal behind the bars for at least 5 years. Also, it can happen to increase the population 
of the prison if the rest of the theories are applied. If a small number of high-rate offenders commit a 
disproportionately large amount of crime, targeting limited prison resources on these offenders should 
achieve  increased  crime  control  without  increasing  prison  populations  unreasonably.  This  policy  will 
depend on the degree of the crime committed and whether the criminal is early in his carrier.  
Compensatory Theory of punishment 

Definition:  

The main look out in the law of crimes is to penalize the criminal, and/or to seek his reformation 
and  rehabilitation  with  all  the  resources  and  goodwill  available  through  the  Courts  and  other 
Governmental  and  non-Governmental  organizations.  It  must  be  seen  that  the  criminals  should  get 
proper judgement for their crimes so caused and the harassment caused to the victim and towards their 
family  members  and  property.  The  victims  in  a  crime  can  be  compensated  on  mainly  two  grounds, 
namely- 

1.  A  criminal  who  had  inflicted  an  injury  against  the  person  (or  group  of  persons),  or  the 

property must be compensated for the loss caused that has caused to the victim, and 

2.  The State that has failed to provide safety towards its citizens, must receive compensation for 

the loss caused. 

Compensation is the true essence of deterrent, reformative and a necessary contribution of retribution. 

Case Laws: 

• In the landmark case of DK Basu v. State of West Bengal the Apex Court held that a victim who is 
under  the  custodial  right,  has  every  right  to  get  compensated  as  her  Right  to  Life,  which  is 
under Article 21 of the Constitution, has been breached by the officer of the State.  

• In State of Gujarat and Anr. v. Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat, Justice  Thomas  had  held  that,  “The 
Reformative  and  reparative  theories  deserve  serious  consideration,  where  the  victim(s)  of 
crime or his family members should get compensated from the wages that is earned in prison 

Page 36 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

by the criminal.” The Court suggested that the particular State should enact a comprehensive 
legislation in respect of his compensation payable to victim of a crime. 

Reformative Theory of punishment 

The idea of the Reformative Theory is hypothesis. As per this hypothesis, the object of discipline 
ought  to  be  the  change  of  the  crook,  through  the  strategy  for  individualization.  It  depends  on  the 
humanistic rule that regardless of whether a wrongdoer perpetrates a wrongdoing, he doesn’t stop to 
be  a  person. In  this  way,  an  exertion  ought  to  be  made  to  change  him/her  during  the  time  of  his/her 
detainment.  For  example,  he  may  have  executed  bad  behaviour  under  conditions  which  may  never 
happen again. Hence an effort should be made to transform him during the hour of his confinement. The 
object of order should be to accomplish the moral difference in the liable party. He ought to be told and 
perform some craftsmanship or industry during the hour of his confinement with the objective that he 
may have the alternative to start his life again after his conveyance from jail. 

History of the Theory: 

The  human  development  has  consistently  been  administered  under  the  standard  of  an 
incomparable  force.  The  job  and  type  of  pre-eminent  force  has  changed  throughout  a  long  term. 
Beginning from the primitive type of Government to the present just, republican and different types of 
Governments, the obligation of the incomparable authority has changed a lot. The idea of discipline has 
additionally changed like the idea of State duty throughout the long term. The idea of discipline relied 
upon  the  premise  of  religion  and  the  organization  of  the  Kings.  During  old  occasions,  the  idea  of 
discipline  was  retributive  premise,  where  the  hoodlums  were  given  uncouth  type  of  discipline. 
Afterward,  over  the  entry  of  ages,  the  significance  of  common  liberties  expanded  which  in  essence 
cleared  path  for  the  replacement  of  Retributive  hypothesis  by  Reformatory  and  Rehabilitative 
hypotheses.  Under  the  Reformative  and  Rehabilitative  hypotheses,  the  blamed  are  given  such 
structures  for  discipline  which  would  change  them  and  keep  them  from  perpetrating  such 
wrongdoings.  
The  theory  of  punishment  being  followed  in  India  with  the  goal  to  change  the  crooks  as  opposed  to 
rebuffing them isn’t that compelling in avoidance of the event of violations in India. The essential idea of 
law isn’t to be static, but to be dynamic in nature. At exactly that point the law will have the option to be 
successful in all fields of the general public. 

The Main Purpose Reformative Theory: 

The  reason  for  this  hypothesis  of  discipline  is  to  make  the  criminal  languish  over  his  bad 
behaviour. Here the motivation behind the discipline is profoundly customized and rotates around the 
mental  outlet  of  the  person  in  question  or  his  family. The  primary  reason  might  be  accomplished  to 
parole  and  probation,  which  have  been  acknowledged  as  current  procedures  of  improving  the  guilty 
parties all around the globe. Consequently, the backers of this hypothesis legitimize imprisonment not 
exclusively  to  separate  hoodlums  and  kill  them  from  society.  Not  many  of  the  advanced  reformative 
procedures of discipline are essentially concocted for the treatment of guilty parties as per their mental 
attributes, for example, probation, parole, uncertain sentence, exhortation and pardon. The reformative 
techniques have demonstrated to be valuable in the event of adolescent misconduct, first wrongdoers 
and ladies. Sex cases additionally appear to react well to the reformative strategy for discipline. All the 
more  as  of  late,  the  reformative  hypothesis  is in  effect  widely  utilized  as  a technique  for  treatment  of 
intellectually denied wrongdoers. 
Criticism: 

1.  Reformative theory anticipates better framework and offices in jail, legitimate co-appointment 
between  various  control  and  diligent  exertion  on  their  part  to  shape  criminals.  It  requires 
gigantic ventures which poor nation can’t bear the cost of. 

2.  A  great  many  guiltless  individuals  who  have  high  respects  for  law  are  finding  hard  to  get 
fundamental courtesies hypothesizes moral avocation for giving better offices inside jail.  

Page 37 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

3.  Also,  the  soundness  of  the  hypothesis  is  more  towards  motivators  for  the  commission  of 

wrongdoing instead of counteraction.  

4.  Transformation can work out on those individuals who can be improved, there are individuals 
who can’t be  changed like bad-to-the-bone lawbreaker, profoundly instructed and proficient 
hoodlums.  

5.  This  theory  disregards  possible  wrongdoers  and  people  who  have  submitted  wrongdoing 
however not inside the arms of law. Further, it ignores the cases of survivors of violations. 
6.  Degenerate  social  ecological  is  liable  for  wrongdoing  yet  not  person  duty,  is  the  way  of 
thinking of reformative which is difficult to process. In any case, it is out of line to excuse the 
honourable  idea  of  reconstruction  as  a  complete  disappointment.  All  know  about  the 
occasions  where  untalented,  uninformed  and  evidently  hopeless  lawbreakers  have  created 
aptitudes in jail, which have changed them into profoundly valuable people. 

Utilitarian Theory of punishment 

The  utilitarian  hypothesis  of  discipline  tries  to  rebuff  guilty  parties  to  debilitate,  or  “hinder,” 
future  bad  behaviour. Under  the  utilitarian  philosophy,  laws  ought  to  be  utilized  to  amplify  the  joy  of 
society.  Since  wrongdoing  and  discipline  are  conflicting  with  bliss,  they  ought  to  be  kept  to  a  base. 
Utilitarian’s comprehend that a wrongdoing-free society doesn’t exist, yet they attempt to incur just as 
much discipline as is needed to forestall future violations.  

The  utilitarian  hypothesis  is  “consequentialist”  in  nature.  It  perceives  that  discipline  has 
ramifications  for  both  the  wrongdoer  and  society  and  holds  that  the  all-out  great  created  by  the 
discipline  ought  to  surpass  the  absolute  malevolence.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  discipline  ought  not  be 
boundless. One delineation of consequentialism in discipline is the arrival of a jail detainee experiencing 
an  incapacitating  sickness.  In  the  event  that  the  detainee’s  demise  is  fast  approaching,  society  isn’t 
served by his proceeded with restriction since he is not, at this point fit for carrying out wrongdoings.  

Under the utilitarian way of thinking, laws that indicate discipline for criminal leads ought to be 
intended  to  dissuade  future  criminal  direct.  Discouragement  works  on  a  particular  and  an  overall 
level. General  discouragement implies  that  the  discipline  ought  to  keep  others  from  carrying  out 
criminal acts. The discipline fills in as an illustration to the remainder of society, and it advises others 
that criminal conduct will be rebuffed. Explicit discouragement implies that the discipline ought to keep 
similar  individual  from  perpetrating  violations.  Explicit  prevention  works  in  two  different  ways. 
Initially,  a  guilty  party  might  be  placed  in  prison  or  jail  to  truly  keep  her  from  perpetrating  another 
wrongdoing  for  a  predefined  period.  Secondly,  this crippling  is  intended  to  be  undesirable  to  such  an 
extent that it will demoralize the guilty party from rehashing her criminal conduct. 

Does Utilitarian Theory Support Death Penalty: 

The  apparent  seriousness  of  capital  punishment,  there  has  been  an  exceptional  debate 
encompassing  the  issue.  Rivals  of  capital  punishment  pronounce  that  it  is  savage  and  harsh  thus  the 
administration  ought  to  get  rid  of  it.  Then  again,  its  allies  keep  up  that  capital  punishment  is  a 
fundamental type of discipline that ought to be utilized on the most horrible guilty parties in the public 
eye. The exceptionally captivated discussion on capital punishment has kept on existing for quite a long 
time. Moral hypotheses can be utilized to concoct an answer for this exceptionally dubious issue. Morals 
figure out what is the correct strategy in a given circumstance. Various strong moral hypotheses have 
been proposed by researchers and scholars throughout the long term. This paper will utilize one of the 
most broadly applied moral hypotheses, which is utilitarianism, to exhibit that capital punishment is for 
sure legitimized.  

Review of the Utilitarian Theory: 

From  a  utilitarian  viewpoint,  activities  that  advance  the  satisfaction  of  the  larger  part  in  the 
public  arena  ought  to  be  sought  after  while  those  that  prevent  this  bliss  ought  to  be  evaded.  The 

Page 38 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

utilitarian  hypothesis  can  be  applied  to  the  issue  of  the  death  penalty  since  this  type  of  discipline 
produces both positive and negative results.  

Net Benefits: 

The  principal  significant  advantage  offered  by  capital  punishment  is  that  it  assumes  a  huge 
discouragement  job.  The  most  significant  objective  of  the  criminal  equity  framework  is  to  debilitate 
individuals from taking part in wrongdoing.  

This is accomplished by joining disciplines to violations with the goal that an individual sees the 
benefits of taking part in unlawful activities as being exceeded by the results. In that capacity, an ideal 
society would be one where nobody is rebuffed since the danger of discipline shields everybody from 
taking  part  in  wrongdoing.  Capital  punishment  is  the  most  extreme  discipline  and  its  accessibility  is 
probably going to dissuade individuals who probably won’t be frightened by long jail sentences.  

From  a  utilitarian  point  of  view,  the  prevention  job  is  moral  since  it  adds  to  the  general 
satisfaction  of  the  general  public.  At  the  point  when  crooks  are  deflected  from  participating  in 
wrongdoing, the general public is more secure and individuals appreciate the harmony and security in 
their networks.  

Another huge advantage offered by capital punishment to the general public is that it prompts 
the  perpetual  debilitation  of  the  indicted  individual.  Not  at  all  like  different  types  of  discipline  which 
just confine a portion of the opportunities of the guilty party, capital punishment removes his life. 

Types/Kinds of punishments under the Indian penal code, 1860 (sections 53 to 75) 

The stage of punishment is the final process of the criminal jurisprudence system. The well-
known fundamental tenet of the criminal law is that a person is considered innocent until proven 
guilty.  The  nature  of  proof  requires  that  the  evidence  before  the  court  must  prove  beyond 
reasonable doubt the guilt of the person who has been accused of the various offences. 
Principle  for  sentencing  –  In  every  criminal  case,  two  aspects  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  –  the 
heinousness or enormity of the crime and based on the circumstance under which the accused has 
committed  the  crime.  Concerning  maximum  imprisonment,  the  same  can  be  awarded  only  with 
the discretion of the judge who will consider the totality of the circumstances before imposing the 
punishments  which  should  be  appropriate  and  just.  Motives  as  well  will  play  a  vital  role  in 
determining the sentence. 

The following are the theories of Punishment, which have evolved over time –  

1.  Deterrent  theory –  The  act  that  takes  away  the  power  of  committing  injury  is  called 
incapacitation,  is  in  the  form  of  remedy  operated  by  the  fear  should  be  the  main  object  of  the 
punishment which is called deterrent theory 

2.  Preventive  theory –  Even  utilitarian’s  like  Bentham  advocated  the  preventive  remedies  which 

tend to prevent offences[1]. 

3.  Retributive  theory –  Retributive  theory  is  based  on  rights,  desert  and  justice[2].  The  guilty 
deserve  to  be  punished,  and  therefore  there  must  be  no  moral  consideration  relevant  to 
punishment  that  outweighs  the  offender’s  criminal  desert  is  the  philosophy  of  retributive 
theory[3]. 

4.  Reformative  theory –  The  object  of  punishment  has  been  considerably  under  the  process  of 
changes  from  the  last  centuries  because  of  the  Welfare  State  concept.  In  Criminal  Law  we 
must  reduce the brutalities of punishment is today’s philosophy of law[4] 

The following are the types of punishments under the Indian penal code provided under sections 
53-60 

1.  Death 
2.  Imprisonment for life 
3.  It has been repealed by act 17 of 1949 

Page 39 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

4.  Imprisonment with two descriptions – Rigorous (Hard labour), Simple Labour 
5.  Forfeiture of property 
6.  Fine 

Let us understand in detail the type of punishments imposed by the courts on the accused 
for the crime they have committed under IPC. 

1.  Death Sentence 
•  The  death  sentence  is  the  harshest  form  of  punishment  under  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  it  involves 

judicial killing or taking the life of the accused as a form of punishment. 

•  Capital punishment is provided for the following offences – a) Treason as in waging, attempting or 
abetting  war against the  government  of  India (section  121), b)  criminal conspiracy to  commit an 
offence  punishable  by  death  (section  132),  c)  Abetment  of  mutiny  committed  (section  132),  d) 
Perjury resulting in the conviction and death of an innocent person (section 195A) e) threatening 
or inducing any person to give false evidence. F) murder, g) abetment of suicide by a minor or an 
insane  person  or  intoxicated  person  h)  attempted  murder  by  a  life  convict  I)  kidnapping  for 
ransom j) causing death or resulting in a vegetative state of a rape victim k) committing rape on a 
girl under the age of 12 L) committing gang rape on a girl under 12 years M) repeat offenders N) 
Dacoity accompanied with murder. 

•  The  constitutional  validity  of  Sec  303:  Rajendra  Prasad  v  State  of  Uttar  Pradesh[5] –  when  the 
supreme  court  concludes  that  the  accused  is  guilty  of  murder  then  the  state  through  the 
prosecutor should be called upon court and state whether the extreme penalty is called for. 

•  Under  Sec  354(3)  CrPC: The  court  has  to  give  a  special  reason  to  explain  why  it  came  to  this 
conclusion.  This  provision  was  introduced  in  the  year  1973  which  was  in  contrast  to  the  earlier 
provision which made the death penalty the rule. 

•  Sec 366 CrPC: Once the sessions Court award the death penalty, the Court has to submit the same 

to the HC for confirmation. The second level of review of the evidence is made. 

•  Cases  where  the  death  penalty  was  confirmed  – state  of  Tamil  Nadu  v  Nalini[6] –  26  persons 
accused  of  being  involved  in  the  conspiracy  to  assassinate  the  former  prime  minister  of  India, 
Rajiv  Gandhi.  In Jai  Kumar  v state of  Madhya Pradesh[7] – Jai  Kumar  was  sentenced  to  death  for 
killing  his  sister-in-law  who  was  pregnant  and  her  eight-year-old  daughter  because  she  did  not 
give him enough food. 

•  Case laws where the death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment – Om Prakash v State of 
Haryana[8] –  where  an  army  man  killed  seven  members  of  a  rival  family.  Kishori  v  state  of 
Delhi[9] – large scale death of Sikhs due to the assassination of then prime minister Indira Gandhi 
by two Sikh men. 

•  Lehna State of Haryana [10]:  when  the  collective  consciousness  of  the  community  is  so  shocked 

that it would expect the holders of judicial power to impose the death penalty. 

•  Bachan  Singh the State  of  Punjab[11] (Constitutional  Bench)  The  Bench  held  that:  A  real  and 
abiding  concern  for  the  dignity  of  human  life  postulates  resistance  to  taking  a  life  through  law’s 
instrumentality. That ought not to be done in the rarest of rare cases when the alternative option 
is unquestionably foreclosed. ‘Rarest of rare’ principle hence evolved in this case. 

2.  Imprisonment for life 
•  Section 53 secondly talks about imprisonment for life which means the sentence of imprisonment 
running  throughout  the  remaining  period  of  a  convict’s  natural  life  unless  it’s  commuted  or 
remitted by the competent authorities. 
In  Gopal  Vinayak  vs  the  state  of  Maharashtra[12],  as  regards  the  nature  of  imprisonment  it  has 
been  held  to  be  rigorous  imprisonment  and  not  simple  imprisonment.  This  was  held  in KM 
Nanavati  vs  the  State  of  Maharashtra[13] and  also  in Naib  Singh  vs  the  State  of  Punjab[14] in 
which the court held that imprisonment for life meant rigorous. 

• 

Page 40 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

•  The accused awarded life imprisonment, therefore, has to be retained in jail for the rest of his life. 
Even  a  state  act  equates  life  imprisonment  with  imprisonment  for  20  years  a  convict  does  not 
entitle to an automatic release on expiry of the term of imprisonment including remission. 

•  The view reiterated in State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Ratan Singh,[15] The supreme court held that it 
was the direction of the government to choose to exercise its discretion to remit either the whole 
or a part of the sentence under section 401(equivalent to section 432 of the present Cr.P.C. 

3.  It has been repleaded (दोहराया 
दोहराया )by the law 
दोहराया 
दोहराया 

4.  Imprisonment with two descriptions – Rigorous (Hard labour), Simple Labor 
•  When it comes to rigorous imprisonment, unlike the simple version the prisoners are put to hard 
labour  such  as  grinding  corn,  digging  the  earth,  drawing  water,  construction  of  roads  and  dams, 
cutting the firewood, bowing wool etc. 

•  However, in the Simpler version, the prisoner is merely confined in jail and is not put to any kind 

of work. 

•  Some  offences  are  made punishable by  both  rigorous and simple imprisonment  under the  Indian 
penal code. Only a trial court has the jurisdiction to award the form of punishment for the convict. 
Some sentences can be wholly or partly rigorous or simple. 

•  Minimum  wages  for  prisoners  –  the  State of Gujarat vs. Honorable High Court of Gujarat[16] when 
there  is  rigorous  imprisonment  is  accompanied  with  hard  labour,  these  prisoners  are  entitled  to 
wages  for  the  work  done  by  them  as  it  is  a  matter  of  right  which  have  to  be  paid  as  it  would 
strengthen the dignity of convicts and penal jurisprudence. 

5.  Forfeiture of Property – 
•  The  punishment  of  forfeiture  of  property  is  ancient,  section  53  fifthly  deals  with  forfeiture  of 
property  as  a  form  of  punishment.  This  principle  has  been  ceased  to  be  a  punishment  except  in 
three types of offences 

•  1st In  cases  where  the  offender  commits  depredation  or  make  preparations  for  committing 
depredations  against  the  government  of  India  will  be  punished  with  forfeiture  of  the  property 
mentioned under section 126. 

•  2nd receiving  any  property  taken  in  the  commission  of  war  or  depredation  is  punished  with 

forfeiture of property which is elaborated under section 127. 

•  3rd if any public servant unlawfully buying or purchasing property in his name or another’s name 

• 

is punished with the same elaborated under section 169. 
In Shoba Suresh Jumani v appellate tribunal[17] –  the  supreme  court  held  that  section  61  and  62 
which  was  repealed  in  1921  is  required  to  be  re-introduced  in  the  law  for  having  the  deterrent 
effect  on  those  who  are  bent  upon  to  accumulate  wealth  at  the  cost  of  society  misusing  their 
power or post. 

6.  Fine 
•  Fine is a forfeiture of money by way of penalty, in sections 137,155,171-177,278,283,294,154,157 
of the  Indian penal code are  offences that carry fine as the sole punishment. Some  offences  fines 
are  imposed  as  an  alternative  punishment.  Some  offences  fines  are  imposed  as  an  additional 
punishment. 

•  Concerning the amount of fine, it will be imposed individually and not collectively. The amount of 

• 

fine should not come unduly harsh. 
In Philip  Bhimsent  Anid  v.  State  of  Maharashtra[18],  The  accused  has  been  convicted  and 
sentenced to  life imprisonment  and  was also ordered to pay a fine  and as  since the offender  was 
only 19 years old and a house servant, he was unable to pay the fine, the court, therefore, reduced 
the fine amount. 

Page 41 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

•  There  is  certain  imprisonment  that  is  imposed  due  to  default  in  payment  of  the  fine,  when  the 

same is paid the imprisonment will be terminated. 

•  Shahejadkhan  Mahebubkhan  Pathan  v  state  of  Gujarat [19]Where  a  substantial  term  of 
imprisonment  is  inflicted  an  excessive  fine  should  not  be  imposed  except  in  exceptional 
cases. Shantilal v state of Madhya Pradesh[20] –The  court  held  that  the  amount  of  fine  should  not 
be harsh or excessive. 

1.4 Capital Punishment 

              Capital punishment also known as death penalty, is the legal practice in India in which a person 
is put to death by state for serious crimes. It is legal but rarely voted and also a highly debated matter in 
India.  Execution  is  not  always  carried  out,  because  of  the  possibility  of  commutation  to  life 
imprisonment.  Since  1995  it  has  been  used  only  five  times  on  Auto  Shankar  in  1995,  Dhananjoy 
Chatterjee in 2004, Ajmal Kasab in 2012, Afzal Guru in 2013 and Yakub Memon in 2015. 

Capital punishment breaches the human rights as it violates the right to life which happens to be 
the most basic of all human rights. Eighty four countries banned the use of capital punishment and the 
number  of  countries  using  this  practice  is  declining.  Being  a  civilised  state  India  should  abolish  the 
Capital  punishment  as  there  is  no  credible  evidence  that  it  deters  crime  more  effectively  than  life 
punishments. 
imprisonment 

other 

and 

This paper analyses the constitutional validity and circumstances under which it may be granted with 
the  help  of  some  admissible  cases  and  the  rarest  of  rare  doctrine  prescribed  by  Supreme  Court 
in Bachan  Singh  case.  This  paper  culminates  by  perceiving  that  Indian  judiciary  always  recedes  from 
implementation of capital punishment as there are other alternative modes of punishment. 

Introduction 
                         Capital punishment is a government sanctioned practice whereby a person is put to death 
by the state as a punishment for the gravest of crimes such as: murder, acts of terrorism, gang rape, etc. 
Terminating the life of a criminal would never terminate the crime itself. Thus, it is often argued that if 
we execute a criminal then there would be no difference between us and the criminal. 

A  majority  of  countries  in  the  world  has  now  abandoned  the  use  of  the  death  penalty.  But  the 
world has not yet formed a consensus against its use. The most populous country in the world, China, 
executes  thousands  of  people  every  year,  and  the  most  powerful  country,  the  United  States,  uses  it 
regularly.1  Eighty-four  countries  retain  the  use  of  capital  punishment.  However,  the  number  of 
countries  employing  the  death  penalty  is  declining  and  it  is  possible  that  worldwide  opinion  and 
pressure will gradually influence all countries to abandon this practice. 

History of capital punishment 

Capital punishment is a method of punitory punishment as old as civilization itself. It is a lawful 
castigation  of  death  as  a  punishment  and  since  ancient  times,  it  has  been  used  for  a  wide  variety  of 
offences. Both the Greeks and Romans invoked the death penalty for a wide variety of offences. 

Socrates and Jesus were perhaps the most famous people ever criticized for a capital crime in the 
ancient  period.  Hammurabis  code,  a  code  of  laws  developed  by  king  of  one  of  the  first  empire,  dates 
back from the third or second millennium before Christ. This code claims that retribution, an eye for an 
eye  and  a  life  for  a  life,  is  justice.  In  Anglo  American  law  the  death  penalty  has  been  a  customary 
offences. 
response 

certain 

kinds 

to 

of 

Evolution of Capital Punishment In India 

Page 42 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

At  independence  in  1947,  India  retained  the  1861  Penal  Code  which  provided  for  the  death 
penalty  for  murder.  During  the  drafting  of  the  Indian  Constitution  between  1947  and  1949,  several 
members of the Constituent Assembly expressed the ideal of abolishing the death penalty, but no such 
provision was incorporated in the Constitution. Private members bills to abolish the death penalty were 
introduced in both houses of parliament over the next two decades, but none of them was adopted. 

It  has  been  estimated  that  3000  to  4000  executions  occurred  between  1950  and  1980. 
Information on the numbers of persons sentenced to death and executed from 1980 to the mid- 1990s 
is harder to measure. It is estimated that two or three persons were hanged per year.5 

In the Bachan Singh 6 judgment of 1980, the Supreme Court ruled that the death penalty should 

be used only in the rarest of rare cases, but what defines rarest of the rare is not clear. 

The Rarest of The Rare Doctrine 

In  1973  to  1980,  the  legislative  dictate  has  changed  from  death  sentence  being  the  norm  to 
becoming  an  exception,  and  necessarily  to  be  accompanied  by  reasons. Bachan  Singh  vs.  State  of 
Punjab,7  was  a  landmark  in  the  escalating  debate  on  the  question  of  the  compatibility  of  the  death 
sentence  with  Art.  21  of  the  Constitution.  The  Supreme  Court  while  holding  the  validity  of  the  death 
penalty expressed the opinion that a real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life postulates 
resistance for taking a life through laws instrumentality. That ought not to be done save in the rarest of 
rare cases, when the alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed. 

                   However,  the  Court  declined  to  formulate  any  aggravating  or  mitigating  factors  as  it  would 
fetter judicial discretion, but held that a murder diabolically conceived and cruelly executed may attract 
extreme penalty. It is not possible, the court opined, to feed numerous imponderable circumstances in 
an imperfect and undulating society. But what are those rarest of rare occasions is the dilemma. 

What  appears  as  brutal  and  gruesome,  to  one  judge  may  not  appear  to  be  so  to  another.  For 
example,  in  one  case  the  murder  of  wife  and  two  children  with  the  motive  of  leading  life  with  the 
paramour could not convince Krishna Iyer, J. for death penalty, while Sen, J. wondered what else could 
be a fit case for death penalty than the one at hand.13 It is submitted that if the difference in perception 
is so glaring among two judges of the highest court in the country what is relative position among very 
large number of sessions judges in the country. 

A. Significance And Extent 
The doctrine rarest of the rare cases is based on Gandhian theory, i.e., hate the crime not the criminal. 
And thus, from this quotation, we can interpret the significance and extent of Death Penalty. And if we 
go  through  the  deep  study  of  it,  we  find  that  the  court  wants  to  say  that  the  death  penalty  should  be 
awarded rarely and only in such cases which are heinous, affecting the humanity and are brutal. 

The  problem  of  Death  Penalty  is  not  very  acute  in  respect  of  death  sentences  awarded  by 
criminal courts in cases of general course of nature because death penalty is being awarded in very few 
cases  of  murder  and  in  most  of  the  cases  of  murder  the  alternative  penalty  of  life  imprisonment  is 
awarded. 

the 

and 

down 

trodden  who 

There is also one other characteristic of death penalty that is revealed by a study of the decided 
cases and it is that death penalty has a certain class complexion or class bias in as much it is largely the 
poor 
penalty. 
             We would hardly find a rich person going to the gallows whoever has money to hire the services 
of  great  talents,  has  a  reasonable  chance  of  escaping  the  gallows  though  he  has  really  committed  a 
murder. It is only the poor, the resource less people who have nobody to support them, who usually go 
to the gallows. The death penalty in its operation is declaratory. Capital punishment Death penalty as 
pointed 
poor. 
                Keeping the above points in the view the Apex Court propounded the doctrine of rarest of rare. 

privilege 

extreme 

warden 

victims 

Duffly 

this 

out 

are 

the 

the 

by 

of 

of 

is 

a 

B. Judicial Discretion And The Circumstances of The Accused 

Page 43 of 149 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The  decision  in Jagmohan  Singh  v.  State  of  U.P 19  involved  a  failed  challenge  to  the 
constitutionality  of  the  death  penalty.  Its  importance  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  highlighted  the  need  for 
noting  special  reason  when  imposing  death  sentences. Bachan  Singh  v.  State  of  Punjab 20  ,which 
followed,  was  landmark  decision,  which  despite  affirming  the  constitutionality  of  the  death  penalty 
diluted the scope of its imposition substantially by introducing the test of rarest of the rare case. 

It was held that: 
….for  persons  convicted  of  murder,  life  imprisonment  is  a  rule  and  death  sentence  is  an 
exception.  A  real  and  abiding  concern  for  dignity  of  human  life  postulates  resistance  to  taking  a  life 
through  law's  instrumentality.  That  ought  not  to  be  done  save  in  the  rarest  of  rare  cases  when 
alternative option is unquestionably foreclosed. 

The present position regarding Capital Punishment, as one might suppose of any system of law 
with  pretensions  of  being  considered  civilised,  is to  use  it  sparingly  as  possible-  i.e. in  Rarest  Of  Rare 
cases and this is the system as it stands in India. To have it in the statute book, but to use it as rarely, is 
the compromise that the Courts, and we as a nation, adopt. In a relatively recent case Panchhi v. State of 
U.P, the Court observed: Brutality of the manner in which a murder was perpetrated may be a ground 
but not the sole criterion for judging whether the case is one of the rarest of rare cases. 
The  death  sentence  is not  a  rule  but  an  exception. Mr  M. Hidayatullah,  the  former  Chief  Justice  of  the 
Supreme Court, observed that the doctrine of the Rarest of Rare evolved in Indian Jurisprudence for use 
specifically with regard to the death sentence is capable of discounting the possible errors and abuse of 
the sanction 

Constitutionality of The Death Sentence 

Indian constitution is an amalgam of many constitutions, i.e., the constitution of America, Britain 
and Japan. It should not surprise anyone, therefore, that the main provisions of the constitution of India 
guaranteeing the right to life has been lifted from the American and the Japanese constitutions. It may 
be added here that what we have borrowed is the form or style of expression and not the right itself. 
The  right  to  life  is  not  the  something  that  constitutions  create  or  even  confer.  The  constitution  only 
recognises this inalienable and indispensable right. 

The  constitutional  provision  is  therefore,  only  evidentiary  value.  Allan  Gledhill  has  given  an 
interesting statement regarding it, which is: In some of the older countries the right to life and liberty 
receives  more  effective  protection  from  constitutional  conventions  than  they  do  in  countries  with 
constitutions elaborating the right. The degree of personal liberty enjoyed by the average Indian is not 
remarkably less than that enjoyed by a citizen of any other parliamentary democracy. 

With  the  on-going  debate  as  to  whether  the  death  penalty  should  be  abolished  or  not,  the 
question  of  constitutionality  of  this  sentence  repeatedly  comes  into  the  spotlight.  The  basic  question 
that  comes  to  the  mind  of  many  peoples  is  how  something  can  be  so  brutal,  barbaric,  uncivilised, 
inhumane, and cruel or degrading, be constitutional. Justice Krishna Iyer observed in Rajendra Prasads 
case. 

It is fair to mention that humanistic imperatives of Indian Constitution, as paramount to punitive 
strategy of Penal Code, have hardly been explored by courts in this field of life or death at the hands of 
the law. The main focus of our judgment is on this poignant gap in human rights jurisprudence within 
the limits of Penal Code, impregnated by the Constitution. 

To put it pithily, a world over voicing the worth of the human person, a cultural legacy charged 
with compassion an interpretative liberation from colonial callousness to life and liberty, a concern for 
social justice as setting the sights of individual justice, interact with the inherited text of the Penal Code 
to  yield  the  goals  desiderated  by  the  Preamble  and  Articles  14,  19,  and  21.Yet,  Article  21  of  the 
Constitution  states, No  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  life  or  personal  liberty  except  according  to 
procedure established by law. 

A. Constitutional Powers Of The Supreme Court In Matters Relating To Death Sentence 

Page 44 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

legitimate  penalty 

Accordingly, the Supreme Court of India, considering the Constitution of India, regards the use of capital 
punishment  as  a 
the  most  extreme  criminal  cases. 
in  certain  of 
               In Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab , the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court discussed at 
length the question of whether the provision of death penalty as an alternative punishment for murder 
is  violation  of  Article  19  and  21  of  the  Constitution.  In  this  judgment,  Justice  P.N  Bhagwati  gave  his 
minority judgment observing that the death penalty is violation of Article 19 and 21 of the Constitution. 
While  the  four  judges  in  majority  agreed  otherwise. Machhi  Singh  and  others  v.  State  of  Punjab,  is 
considered as a landmark judgment on the subject of the death penalty. 

The  Apex  Court  while  discussing  the  aggravating  and  mitigating  circumstances  laid  down  the 
principles which would serve as guideline to the courts while deciding the sentence to be awarded in 
murder cases. Mithu v. State of Punjab is a historical judgment of the full bench of the Supreme Court, 
wherein the court declared Section 303 of the IPC as unconstitutional and violative of Article 14 and 21 
of the Constitution. 
It held that: 
We  Strike  down  Section  303  of  the  Penal  Code  as  unconstitutional  and  declare  it  void.  It  is 
needless to add all cases of murder will now fall under Section 302 of the Penal Code and there shall be 
no  mandatory  sentence  of  death  for  the  offence  of  murder. Therefore  Supreme  Court  has  a 
constitutional power in matters relating to death penalty. 

B.  Constitutional  Powers  Of  The  President  And  The  Governor  In  Matters  Relating  To  Death 
Sentence 

After  all  the  remedies  under  the  judicial  system  are  exhausted,  a  person  on  death  row  has  the 
last  remedy  to  knock  at  the  doors  of  the  first  citizens  of  the  country  and  seek  pardon  in  the  form  of 
mercy  petition  which  must  be  addressed  by  the  convict  either  through  authorised  representative  or 
himself from the prison. The Constitution under Article 72 and 161 confers the power on the President 
and the Governors, respectively, to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases. 

The mercy  jurisdiction of  the  President  and  the  Governors  to  reduce  or  rescind  punishment 
becomes operative only after the courts have delivered conviction and passed sentence. Also, the power 
under Article 72 and 161 bear an onus for the President and Governors to act fairly and reasonably. The 
power of President under Article 72 is wider than that of Governor in the sense that the President has 
exclusive powers to grant pardon in case of death sentence and court martial. 

In  a  petition  of Kuljeet  Singh  alias  Ranga  v.  Lt.  Governor  of  Delhi,  seeking  to  declare  that  the 
President  had  transgressed  his  executive  power  to  grant  clemency  in  exercise  of  the  power  under 
Article 72 of the Constitution, by refusing to grant clemency to him, the Supreme Court- after discussing 
the power of the President to commute the sentence of death – dismissed the petition. 

In Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab, the Supreme Court held that while the mercy petition is pending 
before the President of India, the Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to hear any application for stay on 
execution as it is not maintainable. The President of India has to be approached for a stay of execution. 

It is true that the ambit of capital punishment may be found fundamentally under Article 21 of 
the  Constitution,  it  is  also  true  that  many  countries  have  such  provisions  in  their  constitutions  or  in 
their  law,  which  allow  for  the  use  of  death  penalty.  It  is  certainly  true  that  the  majority  of  these 
countries and the vast majorities of the worlds democratic countries have abolished the death penalty 
in law. Constitutional challenges come in many forms to the death penalty, however, and it is clear that 
challenges regarding its constitutional validity are not limited to death penalty right to life under Article 
India. 
21 
                As 
that: 
Death  penalty  does  not  serve  any  social  purpose  or  advance  any  Constitutional  value  and  is  totally 
arbitrary  and  unreasonable  so  as  to  be  violative  of  Articles  14,  15,  21  of  the  Indian  Constitution….. 
                For the time being, however, despite profound concerns regarding the constitutional validity of 
the death penalty, it has been held as constitutional by the Supreme Court, as already discussed above. 

of 
Bhagwati 

of 
former 

Constitution 

Justice 

stated 

India 

Chief 

P.N 

the 

of 

Page 45 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

It is from this basis that the judiciary of India manage its imperfect application, and from this basis, too, 
proceed. 
which 

application 

challenge 

analysis 

must 

that 

any 

any 

of 

Conclusion 
                  In  the  issues  related  to  the  administration  of  capital  punishment,  some  very  important 
developments  in  the  capital  sentencing  law  have  turned  the  balance  in  favour  of  the  capital  convicts 
substantially.  First,  in Swamy  Shraddananda  case,  the  court  has  emphasised  the  availability  of 
penalty. 
sentences 

sentence 

death 

other 

than 

and 

the 

life 

The Court held that: 

….if the Courts option is limited only to two punishments, one is a sentence of imprisonment, and 
other  is  death  sentence,  the  Court  may  feel  tempted  and  find  itself  nudged  into  endorsing  the  death 
penalty. Such a course would indeed be disastrous. A far more just, reasonable and proper course would 
be to expand the options and to take over what, as a matter of fact lawfully belong to the court. 

Thus Court expanded the range of alternative option which needs to be exhausted before opting 
for death sentence and the Supreme Court gave the judgment in favour of convict in terms of a Bachan 
Singh  case35  –  that  ought  not  to  be  done  save  in  rarest  of  rare  cases  when  alternative  option  is 
unquestionably foreclosed. 

A study of death sentences after the Swamy Shraddananda case36 reveals that many cases which 
normally  would  have  resulted  in  award  of  death  sentences  to  the  prisoners,  have  got  the  benefit  of 
various  alternative  option  between  the  minimum  sentence  of  14  years  to  a  sentence  of  full 
life.37Moreover,  Indian  Jurisprudence  on  death  penalty  is  not  oblivious  to  the  development  in 
international law as also worldwide trends on the issue.38 

The Supreme Court in Bariyar 39 referred to the international trends in the following terms: 
Although  these  questions  are  not  under  consideration  and  cannot  be  addressed  here  and  now, 
we cannot help but observe the global move away from death penalty. Latest statistics show that 138 
nations have now abolished the death penalty in either law or practice. We are also aware that on 18th 
Dec. 2007, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 62/149 calling upon countries that 
retain death penalty to establish a worldwide moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the 
penalty. 
death 

Recently,  the  Apex  Court  in Vodafone  International  Holdings  B.V  v.  Union  of  India stated   that 
certainty is integral to the Rule of Law. In a case involving the imposition of death penalty,  the courts 
cannot  continue  to  judge  under  uncertainty.  The  normative  standards  in  this  behalf must  be  finally 
settled leaving the uncertainty into oblivion, which is the least judiciary can do. Therefore we can say 
that,  Indian  judiciary  is  moving  away  from  the  implementation  of  capital   punishment  as  there  is  a 
greater emphasis on alternative modes of punishment and the  international legal developments which 
are against the such punishments. 

1.5 Stages of Crime 

A crime is defined as the commission of an act that is prohibited by law, or an omission of an act 
that is obligated by the law. In other words, crime may be defined as the disobedience of law. Another 
important  aspect  of  a  crime  is  that  it  affects  the  public  interest,  rather  than  the  rights  of  a  single 
individual, which shall be a part of civil law. 

In India, criminal law is operated through substantive as well as procedural law. The substantive 
law  includes  the Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 (the  Code),  and  the  procedural  law  includes  the Code  of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.). These laws implicitly and also various cases have enunciated that in 
the commission of a crime, there exist four stages. The same forms the scope of the present article and 
has been discussed hereafter. 

Stages of crime 

Page 46 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The  stages  of  crime  or  elements  of  a  crime  include  intention,  preparation,  attempt  and 
accomplishment. The constitution of a crime includes all the elements. Some of these elements are even 
punishable before the accomplishment of the crime. All the stages can be explained further as follows: 
Intention 

The  fundamental  elements  of  a  crime  are ‘mens  rea’ and ‘actus  reus’,  the  former  being  the 
intention  to  commit  a  crime  and  the  latter  being  the  act  done  in  furtherance  of  the  intention.  The 
criminal  liability  of  a  person  shall  be  decided  only  when  he  or  she  has  a mala fide intention.  It  is  the 
direction of conduct towards the objects chosen upon considering the motive which suggests the choice. 
Mere intention shall not constitute a crime, as it is almost impossible to know the intentions of a person. 
As the famous saying goes “the devil himself knoweth not the intention of a man”. Since it is hard to know 
the intentions of a man, a criminal liability at this stage cannot be drawn. 
Mens rea  
Mens  rea  literally  means  guilty  mind.  This  basically  implies  that  a  person  committing  the  crime  is 
mindful  of  his/her  actions  and  knows  that  accomplishment  of  that  act  would  result  in  a  crime.  To 
simplify, the intention of the person committing a crime should be mala fide. Further, mens rea can be 
further  divided  into  four  levels  depending  upon  the  degree  of  intent  of  committing  the  crime.  These 
four levels are: 

1.  Negligence:  This  is  the  least  and  in  fact  the  mildest  form  of  mens  rea  where  the  person  is 
negligent of his/her actions and does not ensure reasonable care in his/her act/omission. 

2.  Recklessness(लापरवाही
लापरवाही):  This  is  of  a  slightly  higher  amplitude  than  negligence  where  the 
लापरवाही
लापरवाही
person can anticipate the crime which may arise out of the act/omission but did not expect or 
intended the same and acts negligently.  

3.  Knowledge: The third level is knowledge where the person is associated with the risks that 
may occur on his act/omission and still continues with such act/omission. Here, he/she is not 
negligent. 

4.  Intent: This is of the highest amplitude where the person intentionally carries out an act or 

omits something in order to commit the crime. 

Actus reus  

Actus reus is the act or omission on part of the person which causes a crime and involves some 
physical  activity.  It is  imperative  to  note  that not  just an  act  but an omission  can also  be  a crime.  For 
example, non-payment of taxes or maintenance is a crime.  
To know more about these two elements, check out this article. 

Preparation 

The next stage of a crime is preparation. It can be understood as an act in furtherance of the mala 
fide intention of a person. It is an act that shall be a means to the attempt and accomplishment of the 
crime. In the previous illustration, if A purchases a weapon legally and carries it  with himself, it shall 
amount to the preparation of the crime. 

Reasons why preparation is not punishable 

The  general  rule  under  the  law  is  that  the  preparation  of  a  crime  shall  not  be  punishable.  The 
reason  behind  the  general  rule  is  that  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  prove  that  the  accused  made  the 
preparation to execute the crime. Apart from this, the test of locus poenitentiae is applied in cases where 
the  culpability  of  preparation  is  in  question.  The  test  provides  that  a  person  has  an  opportunity  to 
withdraw  from  his  act  before  he  actually  commits  the  intended  crime.  The  test  has  been  further 
explained in the subsequent sections. 
Exceptions in which criminal liability may be imposed 
Exceptions to the general rule that a person cannot be held criminally liable for the preparation of an 
act have been provided under the Code. These exceptions include: 

Page 47 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

1.  Preparation  to  wage  a  war  against  the  Government  of  India  – Section  122 of  the  Code 
provides that collection of arms, ammunition, or associating with people with an intention to 
wage a war against the State shall be a punishable offence with imprisonment for a term that 
may not exceed ten years, and such the offender shall also be liable for fine. 

2.  Counterfeiting  coins  – Section  233, Section  234,  and Section  235 of  the  Code  provide  the 
punishment  for  counterfeiting  any  coin,  including  an  Indian  coin  and  the  possession  of  any 
counterfeit coin. These provisions also provide punishment for the preparation of producing 
or using a counterfeit coin. 

3.  Manipulation  of  the  weight  of  the  coins  – Section  244, Section  246 and Section  247 of  the 
Code  provide  the  punishment  for  altering  or  diminishing  the  weight  of  any  coin.  In  these 
circumstances, even the preparation to commit such crimes is punishable. 

4.  Counterfeiting  Government  stamps  – Section  255 of  the  Code  provides  that “Whoever 
counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any stamp issued 
by Government for the purpose of revenue shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine.” In addition to this, the provision also criminalises the possession (Section 256) 
and selling (Section 257) of counterfeiting Government stamps. 

5.  Preparation to commit a dacoity – Section  399 of  the  Code  provides  that “Whoever  makes 
any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”  

6.  Possession of forged documents – Section 474 of the Code provides the punishment for the 
possession of forged documents. The intention behind the provision is to prevent any type of 
fraud that may occur by using such forged documents. 

These offences are punishable at the stage of preparation due to the gravity of the outcome of the crime, 
if committed. 

Attempt 

There exists a very thin line of distinction between the preparation of a crime and an attempt to 
commit  the  same.  It  may  be  defined  as  an  action  in  furtherance  of  the  intention  and  preparation  of  a 
person to commit a crime. Thus, an attempt to commit a crime is often termed “preliminary crime”. An 
attempt to commit a crime is punishable under the Code. It has been provided under various provisions 
for specific crimes. However, in case of the absence of punishment for an attempt to commit a particular 
crime, Section 511 of the Code comes into the picture. Some of the specific provisions of the Code under 
which an attempt to commit a crime have been enumerated hereunder: 

• Section 121 – Attempt to wage a war; 
• Section 131 – Attempt to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty; 
• Section 307 – Attempt to murder; 
• Section 308 – Attempt to culpable homicide; 
• Section 309 – Attempt to suicide; 
• Section 326B – Attempt to throw suicide; 
• Section 356 – Attempt to commit theft; 
• Section 357 – Attempt to wrongfully confine a person; 
• Section 393 – Attempt to commit robbery; 
• Section 397 – Robbery or dacoity with an attempt to cause death or grievous hurt; 

Circumstances under which attempt becomes impossible 

In  the  19th  century,  English  law  established  that  an  attempt  to  commit  an  impossible act  shall 
not be punishable. Cases of the early 19th century were decided on the notion that an attempt cannot be 
made  on  a  crime  that  cannot  be  committed.  Thus,  where  a  pickpocket  thrusts  his  hand  in  an  empty 
pocket of a person, he shall still not be held liable. 

Page 48 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

However,  the  courts  found  the  notion  to  be  illogical  and  unreasonable  in  the  later  part  of  the 
19th  century,  and  hence,  overruled  the  judgements.  This  was  the  first  time  an  attempt  to  commit  an 
impossible act was made punishable. 

Section  511  of  the  Code  particularly  provides  that  any  attempt  to  commit  an  impossible  act  is 
punishable. The illustrations provided under the provision are indicative of the same. Thus, under the 
Indian Penal Code, an attempt to commit an impossible act is punishable. 

Difference between preparation and attempt 

The  difference  between  the  preparation  and  attempt  to  commit  a  crime  is  a  crucial  one.  It  can 
determine  the  criminal  liability  of  a  person.  The  prime  difference  between  the  two  is  the  fact  that 
whether the act that has already been finished during the stages of crime, has an impact on the victim. If 
it has an impact, it is considered to be an attempt, otherwise, it is considered to be mere preparation. 
The  Courts  in  various  cases  have  attempted  to  differentiate  between  the  two  through  various  tests, 
which shall be discussed hereunder. 

Tests for determining an attempt to commit a crime 

• Proximity  (िनकटता 
िनकटता )rule  –  The  proximity  rule  provides  that  in  cases  where  the  accused 
िनकटता 
िनकटता 
accomplishes  a  series  of  acts  in  furtherance  of  his  intention  to  commit  a  crime,  the  liability 
shall be decided upon the proximity with the completion of the Act. 

• Locus Poenitentiae (तप(cid:7021)या का (cid:7021)थान 
तप(cid:7021)या का (cid:7021)थान )– The doctrine of locus poenitentiae provides that where a 
तप(cid:7021)या का (cid:7021)थान 
तप(cid:7021)या का (cid:7021)थान 
person withholds himself from the actual commission of the crime, it would amount to mere 
preparation.  The  doctrine  was  propounded  after  analysing  that  a  person  has  a  reasonable 
opportunity to withdraw himself from committing the crime. 

• Equivocality Test (समानता परी(cid:6979)ण
समानता परी(cid:6979)ण) –  The  Equivocality  test  states  that  when  an  act  of  a  person 
समानता परी(cid:6979)ण
समानता परी(cid:6979)ण
can prove beyond reasonable doubt the likeliness of committing the crime, it shall constitute 
as an attempt to commit the crime rather than mere preparation. 

उपलि(cid:7011)ध) 
Accomplishment (उपलि(cid:7011)ध
उपलि(cid:7011)ध
उपलि(cid:7011)ध

The accomplishment of a crime is when an attempt to commit a crime is successfully executed. 
Every  person  shall  be  liable  for  the  act,  offence  or  crime  that  he  commits  or  accomplishes.  The 
provisions of the Code provide for specific punishments for various crimes in the country. 

Stage at which liability commences 

The  above  discussion  reveals  how  these  four  stages of  crime  decide  the  criminal  liability  of  an 
accused.  Undisputedly,  at  the  level  of  accomplishment,  the  criminal  liability  of  a  person  shall  arise. 
Nevertheless,  the  above  discussion  reveals  how  the  liability  can  commence  even  at  the  stage  of  the 
attempt  and  in  some  cases,  even  at  the  stage  of  preparation.  Usually,  in  such  instances,  the  crime 
committed is very serious and poses a threat to society. Hence, the main object of ascertaining liability 
at such stages is to create a deterrent effect in the minds of people and prevent them from committing 
such heinous crimes.  

(cid:7008)याियक घोषणाएँ) 
Judicial Pronouncements ((cid:7008)याियक घोषणाएँ
(cid:7008)याियक घोषणाएँ
(cid:7008)याियक घोषणाएँ
Asgarali Pradhania v. Emperor (1933) 

In  this case,  the  Calcutta  High  Court,  while  distinguishing  between  an  attempt  to  commit  an 
offence and its preparation, was of the opinion that not every act done by the accused can constitute an 
attempt to commit the said offence. The facts of the case included the accusation of an attempt to cause 
a miscarriage of his ex-wife. The Court held that if the accused, with an intention to administer a drug 
which shall cause a miscarriage, administers any harmless substance instead, he shall not be liable for 
the  attempt  to  cause  miscarriage.  However,  if  the  failure  of  the  accused  is  caused  by  someone  else,  it 
shall result in the contrary. 

Page 49 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Madan Lal v. State of Rajasthan (1986) 

In  this case,  the  convict  was  sentenced  to  rigorous  imprisonment  for  two  years  when  found 
guilty of attempting to commit rape of the victim under Section 376 read with Section 511 of the Code. 
The  facts  of  the  case  included  three  prime  witnesses,  who  found  the  convict  laid  down  naked  on  the 
victim,  who  was  also  found  naked,  and  the  mouth  of  the  victim  was  covered  by  the  convict’s  hand.  It 
was established the convict himself removed his clothes and that of the victim and had an intention to 
rape the victim. 

The Court, while analysing the stage of attempt, held that “It is the stage beyond preparation and 
it precedes the actual commission of the offence. An attempt to commit an offence is not meant to cover 
only the penultimate act towards the completion of an offence but it also covers all those acts or series of 
acts  which  travel  beyond  the scope  of preparation  and  exhibit  a  definite  intention  and  determination  to 
commit  a  particular  offence.  It  need  not  be  an  act  which  just  precedes  the  last  act  on  the  happening  of 
which  the  offence  itself  is  committed  but  it  covers  all those acts  or series  of  acts  which  may precede  the 
penultimate act towards the commission of that offence.”  

State of Madhya Pradesh v. Narayan Singh (1989) 

In  this case,  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  commission  of  an  offence  involves  four 
stages; i.e. intention, preparation, attempt and commission. The first two stages of these offences would 
not attract culpability, however, the last two stages would attract it. In this case, the respondents were 
trying to export fertilisers without a permit from Madhya Pradesh to Maharashtra. Hence, the act was 
considered to be an attempt of the offence rather than just preparation. 
Nasim v. Senior Superintendent of Police (2002) 

This  case  is  related  to  cow  slaughter  which  attracts  criminal  liability  as  per UP  Prevention  of 
Cow Slaughter Act, 1955. The petitioner, in this case, was found to be holding a knife, 38cm in length, 
and to be sitting on the top of a cow with all of its legs tied. The instant petition was filed for quashing 
an FIR registered under Section 3 and Section 8 of the impugned Act. Relying upon the Narayan Singh 
case (1989) as discussed above, the Hon’ble Allahabad High Court held that preparation had been done 
by  the  petitioner  and  he  would  have  moved  to  the  third  stage  i.e.  attempt  had  he  not  been  stopped. 
Resultantly,  he  had  criminal  liability  as  attempt  and  accomplishment  of  crime  would  have  attracted 
liability under the said Act. 

Mathivanan v. the State of Tamil Nadu (2021) 

In this case, the Madras High Court reiterated that the first and the second stage (intention and 
preparation)  are  generally  not  culpable,  whereas  the  third  and  the  fourth  stage  (attempt  and 
accomplishment)  are  culpable.  However,  exceptions  to  this  general  notion  are  the  offences  under 
Section 122 and Section 399 of the Code.  

Commenting  on  Section  122  of  the  Code,  the  Court  opined  that “To  wage  war  would  require 
several steps and crossing of stages. There has to be mobilisation of men as well as accumulation of arms 
and ammunition. That would require a concerted effort. Each individual who is a party to the conspiracy 
to wage war may be allotted a particular task. One may be tasked with collecting men, another with arms 
and  the  third  with  ammunition.  The  expression  “otherwise  prepares”  in  this  context  should  not  be 
construed  on  the  application  of  the  principle  of  ‘ejusdem  generis’.  A  person  may  be  engaged  in  fund-
raising.  Another  may  be  responsible  for  providing  reinforcements.  Some  may  be  engaged  in  making 
logistical arrangements. Some may be engaged in the intellectual front. There could be several dimensions. 
All  of  them  would  fall  within  the  scope  of  “otherwise  prepares”.  But  as  already  held,  when  it  comes  to 
application of the provision to concrete facts, courts will apply a higher threshold.” 

Satvir Singh v. State of Punjab (2001) 

In  this case,  the  appellants  were  accused  of  abetting  an  attempt  to  commit  suicide,  which  was 
done by the wife of the primary appellant. The issue before the court was whether it was whether, in an 

Page 50 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

episode of an attempt to suicide made by a person due to harassment by another, the person harassing 
such  person  shall  be  liable  for  an  attempt  to  abet  the  commission  of  suicide.  The  Court  answered  in 
negative, stating that an attempt to abet shall only be punishable if the said offence has been committed, 
hence providing successful abetment. In case the said offence has not been committed, the abettor shall 
not be held liable. 

Abhayanand Mishra v. State of Bihar (1961) 

In  this case,  the  appellant  was  a  candidate  appearing  in  an  entrance  examination  of  the  Patna 
University for the course of M.A. in English. In his application form, the appellant had provided that he 
was a graduate and was also teaching in certain schools after his graduation. However, the University, 
only after dispatching his admit card for the examination, found the information to be forged. He was 
convicted by the lower court and the High Court under Section 420 read with Section 511 of the Code. 
Under  the  appeal  before  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court,  the  contention  of  the  appellant  was  that  it  was 
mere preparation to commit fraud and not an attempt. The Court rejected the argument and held that 
when the appellant submitted the forged information, it constituted preparation to commit fraud, and 
when the said forged documents were dispatched, it amounted to an attempt. The court reiterated that 
an attempt may not be seen as only the penultimate act, rather, it means any act in furtherance of the 
preparation. 

1.6 Theories of Negligence (Liability) 
Negligence  is  as  a  basis  of  legal  liability  negligence  like  intention  is  another  significant  form  of 
mens rea it is also important part of a crime. 

Meaning 

  Negligence means to neglect the Duty or Carelessness. 
  A legal duty to take care. 
  Breach of that duty; and. 
  Consequential damage to the plaintiff. 

Definition 

  Salmond: - Negligence is culpable carelessness. 
  Winfield  :-  “the  breach  of  a  legal  duty  to  take  care  which  results  in  damage  undesired  by  the 

defendant to the plaintiff”. 

  Justice  willes:  -  it  is  the  absence  of  such  care  as  it  was  the  duty  of  the defendant to use. 
  Puolus: - Magna negligentia culpaest, magna culpa dolus est. 
  Pollock:- Negligence is not actionable  unless the duty to be careful exists. 
  Katillwail  Watson  :-  Fraud  imports  design  and  purpose  ,  negligence  that  you  are  acting 

carelessly and without that design. 

Essential element of negligence 

1.  Duty -  The  defendant  owed  a  legal  duty  to  the  plaintiff  under  the circumstances; 

2.  Breach - The defendant breached that legal duty by acting or failing to act in a certain way; 

3.  Causation - It was the defendant's actions (or inaction) that actually caused the plaintiff's injury; 

Page 51 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

4.  Damages - The plaintiff was harmed or injured as a result of the defendant's actions. 

Theories of Negligence (लापरवाही के  िस(cid:7373)ांत) 

is  culpable  carelessness.  Though 
it 

1.  Subjective  theory  of  negligence  -the  theory  so  propounded  by  Salmond  means  that 
thoughtfulness  or 
negligence 
“negligence 
inadvertence,  nonetheless 
essentially  consists 
to  one’s 
its  consequences”.  A  man  may  be  held  liable  on  the  basis  of  negligence  if  he 
conduct  and 
sufficiently  does  not  desire  to  avoid  a  particular  consequence.  Professor  Winfield  who  strongly 
supported  Salmond  view,  also  stated  that  negligence its other signification is merely a stste of  mind, 
inadvertence to some duty. 

an 
in  the  mental  attitude  of  undue 

it 
attitude  of 

indifference  with  respect 

indifference.  Accordingly, 

is  not  equivalent  to 

is 

2.  Objective  theory  of  negligence-  According  to  this  theory  advocated  by  sir  Federick  Pollock
“negligence  is  the  contrary  of  diligence  and  no  one  describes  it  as  the  state  of  mind”.  this 
theory postulates that negligence is an objective fact .it is not an attitude of mind or a form of mens rea 
at all, but to particular  standard  of  conduct. It  is breach  of  duty  of not taking  care  ,  and to take  care 
means  to  take  precautions  against  the  harmful  results  of  one’s  action  and  to  refrain  from 
unreasonably dangerous kinds of act. 

Defenses 

  Act of god. 
  Inevitable accident. 
  Contributory negligence 

Cases 

Lord  Atkin  in  Donoghue  v.  Stevenson, put  it thus:  “You  must  take  reasonable  care  to  avoid  acts  or 
omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. Who then, in 
law,  is  my  neighbor?  The  answer  seems  to  be  persons  who’re  closely  and  directly  affected  by 
my  act  that  I  ought  reasonably  to  have  them  in  contemplation  as  being  so  affected  when  I’m 
directing  my  mind  to  the acts or omissions which are called in question.” 

Whitt  v.  Silverman  If  someone  creates  a  hazardous  situation  through  his  own  action  or 
inaction and can reasonably foresee a later injury, a breach may  be  proven  from  the  circumstances 
without  resorting  to  a  statute  or contract. 

Damages for Injuring People 

Where  the  negligence  causes  personal  injuries,  a  plaintiff  may  seek  damages  from  the 

wrongdoer for: 

1. past and future medical expenses.; 
2. past and future lost wages; 
3. pain and suffering; 
4. mental anguish; 
5. Inconvenience; 
6. the loss of the capacity for the enjoyment of life; 

1.7 Introduction to Cyber Crimes 

India as we all know is the second most populous country in the world with population around 
138  cores  and  out  of  which  millions  and  millions  of  internet  subscribers.  According  to  telecom 
regulatory Authority of India in March 2021 there are about 825.30 million active subscribers in India. 

Page 52 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

With their average data consumption over 20 GB a month. This is all possible because of accessibility of 
internet and cheaper rates in India. 

It  is  surprising  to  know  that  the  first  ever  cybercrime  was  recorded  in  the  year  1820.  It  is 

believed and argued that cyber or digital crime in India started since 2005. 

What is cyber space? 

Cyber space can be considered as a realm of interconnected computers or to be more specific, a 
network  of  electronic  devices  that  is  used  to  store  transmit  or  modify  data  over  the  net.  It  generally 
involves  a  widespread  network  of  electronic  devices  throughout  the  globe  that  works  interconnected 
Lee  to  share  information  and  as  well  to  receive  it  they  use  TPC  or  IP  protocol  in  order  to  perform 
communication  and  to  have  data  over  the  air.  Cyberspace  is  a  virtual  world  in  itself  with  millions  of 
users. 

What is cybercrime? 

Cybercrimes  or  digitalized  crimes  can  be  considered  as  the  crimes  that  are  committed  using 
electronic devices namely smart phones or interconnected computers. There can be variety of motives 
to commit a cybercrime such as sexual exploitation prime fraud or even vengeance. With the time the 
number of cybercrime cases in India are as well increasing with an exponential number. This number is 
proportionate to the number of subscribers that are increasing day by day. The Ministry of home affairs 
reported around 51,000 cybercrime cases in the year 2020 

Types of cybercrimes: 
There are numerous types of cybercrimes, and are some of the most common forms of Cybercrimes: 

Distributed denial of Service Attack 

This type of attack that is distributed denial of service attack is a malpractice and an attempt to 
disturb the normal inflow of the targeted server, service, and network by overcrowding the target with 
floods  and  floods  of  traffic.  This  attack  causes  inconvenience,  hanging  of  servers,  failure  in  showing 
results etc. 

Phishing 
             Fishing is a kind of cybercrime in which the victim or the target is approved by way of sending 
spam emails, telephonic calls, SMSes by someone who impersonated himself to be a legitimate person 
or  organization  in  order  to  gain  your  personal  information.  They  usually  send  such  message  that 
requires to fill in your details like, bank information or social medial passwords in order to access the 
information. This is done to gain unlawful access of your personal accounts and to commit frauds and 
money. 
withdraw 

Spamming 
            The  act  of  spamming  is  a  cybercrime  which  involves  sending  of  unwonted  and  requested  bulk 
message  via  email  ID  or  two  in  individual.  There  are  various  types  of  spamming  such  as  engine 
spamming,  blogs  spamming,  ad  spamming,  social  spamming  etc.  It  disturbs  the  administrator  of  a 
website. 

Hacking 
                It is an act of first identifying a backdoor into others' computer in order to gain unlawful and 
unauthorized access to the data inside such computer. This back door is exploited to gain access to the 
computer. 

Page 53 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Cross Site Scripting 

Cross-Site  Scripting  (XSS)  assaults  are  a  kind  of  instillation,  in  which  mischievous  scripts  are 
introduced  into  otherwise  trustworthy  websites.  XSS  assaults  happens  while  an  attacker  uses  a  web 
application to direct mischievous code, usually in the form of a browser side script, to a different end 
user.  Failings  that  lead  these  assaults  to  thrive  are  fairly  prevalent  and  occur  wherever  a  web 
application  uses  input  from  a  user  within  the  output  it  creates  without  certifying  or  encrypting  it. 

Identity Theft 

This  is  an  act  of  stealing  personal  information  of  a  targeted  individual  and  later  using  such 
information to impersonate him/her. With the help of the acquired information the offender pretends 
laws  being  the  victim. 
to  be  the  targeted  person 

in  order  to  commit  fraud,  or  violate 

Piracy Violation and IPR Infringement 

Most  people  download  movies,  games  and  other  digital  content  from  websites  and  providers 
such as TORRENT which is pirated material. Pirated material is such material which is not free to use 
for  all  and  is  distributed  freely  by  third  party  and  not  the  actual  developer  of  such  material.  Similar 
offenders  also  use  the  trademark  and  goodwill  of  other  famous  companies  in  order  to  commit  fraud 
people. 
against 

Brute Force Attacks 

In this type of cyber security attack the assaulter tries and testes various types of alphabetic and 
the  victims  account. 

combination  until 

correct  password 

finds 

the 

to 

it 

numerical 

Malware 
This can be considered as a wide term used for various types of viruses or program that are designed to 
access the information of the victim without his knowledge and consent. 

Trojans 
           Trojans can be considers as CURSE IN DISGUIES, as on face it may appear to be a useful software 
for the benefit of the user but in actuality is built to cause damage to the users device. 

What are the Cybercrime Legislation in India? 
Internet today is a necessity more than ever. Moreover, this pandemic situation due to Coronavirus has 
led almost every work online. With this online traffic more than ever cybercrimes has also skyrocketed. 
Some  of  the  examples  of  this  cybercrime  is  replicating  Bank  credit  cards,  KYC  frauds  dark  web, 
pornography, cyber terrorism etc. 

The cybercrimes are penalized under the information technology act 2000 and the Indian penal 
code. The IT act deals with cybercrime and electronic frauds. This act lays down definitions for various 
cybercrimes and as well the punishment for it. The main objective of this legislation is the protection of 
common man from cybercrimes and two ensure proper governance banking and commerce throughout 
the internet. 
Some  of  the  Crime  under  the  Information  Technology  Act  can  be  noted  as  follows: 
Chapter  XI  of  the  information  Technology  Act  deals  with  Offences  and  some  of  the  common 
offences committed under this Act are as follows: 

Section 65: 

The section 65 of IT act deals with tampering of computer source documents. Which is penalized for 
three  years  of  imprisonment  and  a  fine  that  may  go  up  to  2  lakhs.  Considering  an  example  for  it  a 

Page 54 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

telecom  company  was  held  guilty  for  tampering  with  the  serial  number  of  mobile  phones  of  a  X 
company so that the mobile phone only works with their company SIM card. 

Section 66: 

Section 66 of IT act deals with hacking of computer systems and or unauthorized and unapproved 
use  of  computer  network  and  system.  This  is  penalized  for  a  fine  up  to  5  lakh  rupees  and  or 
imprisonment that may go up to 3 years. Considering an example for this : and if a hacker hacked into a 
network  service  provider  and  change  the  passcode  of  persons  authorized  to  use  our  service  so  as  to 
deny the axis such act is criminalized under section 66 of IT act. 

Section 66C: 

Section  66C  of  the  IT  act  deals  with  identity  theft  by  using  password  or  biometrics  even  digital 
signatures to execute fraud on others and to impersonate the victim. Considering the example for this : 
the criminal via unfair means obtain the login ID and password of the victim of a e-commerce account 
or a bank account and transfers the money to his account this is illegal and unlawful. Such transfer is 
unauthorized and is criminalized in the IT act under section 66C. 

Section 66D: 

Section 66D Deals with cheating by personating using computer resource. It is a punishable offence 
with  up  to  3  years  of  imprisonment  and  fine  me  go  up  to  1  lakh.  Consider  the  example  as  follows  :  a 
criminal  impersonates  himself  to  be  someone  else  on  the  internet  and  induces  the  victim  to  transfer 
money maliciously can be found guilty under the IT act under section 66D. 

Section 66E: 

Section  66E  of  the  IT  act  deals  with  capturing  stills  of  unauthorized  areas,  making  it  public  or 
sharing without the consent of the person is an offence under the IT act. The penalty for such an offence 
can be imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine that may go up to 2 lakh rupees. 

Section 66F: 

Section  66F  of  the  IT  act  covers  cyber  terrorism.  Cyber  terrorism  can  be  considered  as  politically 
driven agenda that uses information technology to cause severe anguish and widespread distress and 
anxiety in the society. This is an office if found guilty can be imprisoned for life. An example for this can 
be considered as follows , The stock exchanges of India that is BSE  and NSE where is threatened that 
their  cyber  security  will  be  shattered  and  a  terror  attack  was  to  be  apprehended  upon  these  stock 
exchanges, the attacker was caught and was penalized under this section of IT act. 

Section 67: 

Section  67  of  the  IT  act  deals  with  publication  of  obscene  material  or  nudity  on  E-platforms.  Any 
person  found  guilty  can  be  imprisoned  for  up  to  5  years  and  a  fine  that  is  up  to  10  lakh. Example  for 
this: the accused leaked nude and obscene photos of the  victim when the victim refused to marry the 
accused, he was held guilty under section 67 of the IT act. 

Some of the development in the INDIAN PENAL CODE 1860, which led to recognition of crimes in 
the electronic mode as well are as follows- 

Section 379: 

Section  379  of  the  Indian  penal  code  deals  with  punishment  for  theft.  The  punishment  for  such 
crime can be imprisonment up to 3 years and or fine. The enlarged view of this section as well includes 
the cybercrime committed using stolen devices or computers. 

Section 420: 

Page 55 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 420 of the Indian penal code deals with fraud or cheating. Fraud or cheating and maliciously 
causing someone to deliver a property. Some of the common cybercrimes such as fake websites, Ponzi 
schemes, and online misleading ads are punishable under the section of IPC. This crime can land you in 
jail for up to 7 years of imprisonment and or fine. 

Section 463: 

Section 463 of the Indian penal code deals with making or developing invalid documents and false 
electronic  records  this  crime  as  well  can  land  you  in  jail  for  a  term  of  up  to  7  years  and/or  fine. 

Section 468: 

Section 468 of the Indian penal code deals with forgery. The act of committing forgery with an intent 
of  cheating  will  attract  this  section  of  IPC,  an  example  for  this  is  email  spoofing  and  it  is  punishable 
offence with the quantum of imprisonment up to 7 years and or fine. 

Some Cases: 

  Yahoo  v.  Akash  Arora (1999)  here  the  accused  used  the  domain  and  trademark 
YahooIndia.com  and  permanent  injunction  was  sought.  It  was  one  of  the  earliest  case  of 
cybercrime in India. 

  NASSCOM v. Ajay sood & ors. (2005) here the defendants were headhunters and recruiter used 
the name of NASSCOM (NASSCOM) of on the biggest and reputed software association) and sent 
various mails for fetching personal information from individuals. This was a case of Phishing. 
  State  of  Tamil  Nadu  v.  Suhas  Katti. (2004)  here  the  accused  used  to  send  obscene  and 

defamatory material to a divorced lady. He was convicted under section 67 of the IT Act. 

  Kalandi Charan Lenka v. The State of Odisha: 

here  the  accused  anonymously  sent  various  messages  of  damaging  character,  the  accused 
stalked  and  created  fake  account  of  the  victim.  He  morphed  the  victims  face  in  compromising 
pictures. He was convicted under S.354 D of IPC for cyber stalking. 

How to protect yourself from Cybercrimes? 
Better Passcode for your Accounts: 

When  most  of  us  talk  about  password  we  think  of  alphanumerical  combination  that  is  easily 
remembered by us and it is related to us in some or the other ways. Hence we go for major events in our 
life such as our birthday, marriage anniversary etc. These kind of memorable events of our life are easy 
to remember but are easily decoded as well. This may cause you seizure to your privacy and pose you at 
financial risk. 

A password should be Lengthy enough so that it would be hard to guess and short enough that 
you  should  remember  it,  it  should  be  a  combination  of  alphabets  both  small  and  capital  and  a 
combination of numbers and symbol as well. 
For example: 
XaV1_ba₹B such a combination is difficult to decode and will keep you safe. 
Keeping Software updated regularly: 

Keeping software updated regularly keeps your risks at bay. It is very important for one to keep 
the  software  up-to-date  as  it  prevents  and  removes  any  loopholes  and  back  those  in  the  previous 
software and tightens the security. Any available and most likely used exploits are passed in every new 
software  update  that  ensures  your  security  and  your  privacy  is  not  compromised,  so  it  is  very 
important for one to promptly keep software is up-to-date. 
Lucrative pops = High risk: 
Cautious!  This  add  looks  so  lucrative,  but  how  am  I  getting  this?  How  is  it  so  relevant  to  my 
interest? 
                 When  you  browse  through  the  internet  you  may  find  very  attractive  pop-ups  and  ads,  but 
beware most of these ads are scams and are frauds. Internet uses AI based algorithm to show you are 

Page 56 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

relevant  ads  and  to  make  them  look  more  appealing  to  you.  Try  to  avoid  such  ads  as  they  might  be 
fraudulent and misleading. Many a times while you are browse internet there appear a pop-up that asks 
you to enter your ID and password to proceed forward this is a red flag you should clearly go back and 
not enter to such ads. Moreover nowadays fraudulent activities of sending emails that asks you to fill 
your ID password are very prevalent, Beware a genuine Business will never ask you to fill ID password 
through emails. One has to be vigilant while surfing the internet. 
 Use Good VPN service: 

Secure  yourself  with  a  good  VPN  service.  VPN  stands  for  virtual  private  network.  What  a  VPN 
does is it encrypts all the information until it reaches its desired destination that means if any you are a 
victim of a cyber-assault, the assaulter won't be able to reach you. Using a VPN whenever you are at a 
public  network  will  keep  you  safe  from  cyber-attacks.  With  a  VPN  you  are  ensured  that  you  are  not 
being tracked or traced and you can browse the internet safely. 
 Keeping Social Profiles not so Social: 

Though  it  may  sound  weird  but,  posting  everything  and  anything  on  social  media  that  is 
somewhat private to you may pose you to a security risk. Posting something like your birthdate, your 
dog's name, major events of your life, makes you predictable and makes your password easier to crack. 
Cyber attackers look for such information out of your social media accounts. Thus limiting the extent to 
which  what  you  post  on  social  media  can  help  you  safeguard  yourself  from  cyber-attacks. 
 Using Good Anti-Virus Software: 

It  is  always  a  good  idea  to  have  antivirus  and  net  protector  installed  in  your  PC.  It  is  not  only 
ensures that your PC is free of any virus but also regulates and protects your activities online. Antivirus 
constantly checks for any malicious codes or activities within your PC also keeping it updated regularly 
will  ensure  that  your  PC  is  free  of  any  risk.  Net  protector  on  the  other  hand  monitor  your  online 
activities and notify you if they sense any malicious or fraudulent activity or application that you might 
end up entering into. Both of these work together to make your online and offline experience flawless 
and free from cyber-attacks. 
Do Not: 

1.  Do not open attachments from spam Emails. 
2.  Do not click on links from Spam Emails and untrusted websites. 
3.  Do not give out personal information unless you are 100% sure. 

MODULE 2: 
2.1 Extent and Operation - 
IPC Chapter I: Sections 1 – 5 
2.2 General Explanations 
IPC Chapter II: Sections 6 - 52 
2.3 General Exceptions 
IPC Chapter IV: Sections 76 - 106 
2.4 Abetment 
IPC Chapter V: Sections 107 120 
2.5 Criminal Conspiracy 
IPC Chapter V-A: Sections 120 A & B 
2.6 Attempts 
IPC Chapter XXIII: Section 511 
1. Unlawful Assembly, Gang Rape and Dacoity from point of view of Joint criminal liability 

2.1 Extent and Operation - 
IPC Chapter I: Sections 1 – 5 

Page 57 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Preamble— 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for India; It is enacted as follows:— 
Section 1: Title and extent of operation of the Code.— 
This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and shall extend to the whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
Section 2: Punishment of offences committed within India.— 
Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission 
contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India. 
Section  3:  Punishment  of  offences  committed  beyond,  but  which  by  law  may  be  tried  within, 
India.— 
Any person liable, by any Indian law, to be tried for an offence committed beyond India shall be dealt 
with according to the provisions of this Code for any act committed beyond India in the same manner as 
if such act had been committed within India. 
Section 4: Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.— 
The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by— 
(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India; 

1.  any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be. 

(3)  any  person  in  any  place  without  and  beyond  India  committing  offence  targeting  a  computer 
resource located in India. 
Explanation.—In this section— 

1.  the  word  “offence”  includes  every  act  committed  outside  India  which,  if  committed  in  India, 

would be punishable under this Code; 

1.  the expression “computer resource” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of sub-

section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); 

Section 5: Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.— 
Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion of officers, 
soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the Government of India or the provisions of any special or 
local law. 

IMPORTANT CASE LAWS 
1. Jurisdiction of the Indian Penal Code 
Central Bank of India v. Ram Narain, AIR 1955 SC 36 : 
“4. The sole question for determination in the appeal is whether on a true construction of Section 188 of 
the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  and  Section  4  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  the  East  Punjab  Government  had 
power to grant sanction for the prosecution of Ram Narain for offences committed in Pakistan before his 
migration to India. 
13. ………. we are of the opinion that the decision of the High Court that Ram Narain could not be tried in 
any  court  in  India  for  offences  committed  in  Mailsi  in  November  1947,  is  right  and  that  the  Provincial 
Government  had  no  power  under  Section  188  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  to  accord  sanction  to  his 
prosecution.” 

2.2 General Explanations 
IPC Chapter II: Sections 6 – 52 

SECTION 6– Definition in the code to be understood subject to exceptions- 
Every definition, penal provision and illustration of all the offences covered under this code should be 
read as a subject to the relatable exceptions, mentioned in chapter IV- General Exceptions. 
This section imposes restriction in validating the applicability of offences, without being bothered about 
chapter IV, by declaring definitions to be a subject to general exception (ch. IV). 
Highlights: 

Page 58 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

•  Basically, section 6 is immunity from criminal liability for an offender if he or she does not fall under 
any provision of chapter IV. 
•  Instead,  of  mentioning  exceptions  repeatedly,  it  was  better  to  have  separate  chapter  for  it.  (One 
single  exception  would  be  applicable  to  more  than  one  offence  committed  by  a  single  category  of 
offender. Example- children under 7 years of age cannot commit offence like murder, etc) 
•  This section is to be read as a subject to chapter IV provisions (section-76 to 106). 
SECTION 7– Sense of expression once explained- 
Every expression talked about in this Code, is confirmed with chapter II. 
SECTION 8– Gender-“he”, use for any person, male or female. 
SECTION 9– Number- Unless contrary appears from context, words importing: 
•  The singular number include the plural number and 
•  The plural number include the singular number. 
SECTION 10– “Man”, “Women” 
•  Man- male human being of any age. 
•  Woman- female human being of any age. 
Highlight 
•  Principal significance lies in word “of any age”. 
•  Thus,  women  includes  infant  female  (section  354,  IPC-  assault  or  criminal  force  to  women  with 
intent to outrage her modesty). 
SECTION 11- “Person”- 
Any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
Highlight 
•  Effect of this section, with expression- 
•  Any company, whether incorporated or not, 
•  Any association of persons, whether incorporated or not and 
•  Anybody of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
•  Criminal liability of corporations- Those corporations may be: 
•  Either corporate sole (one person or entity construed by law as an artificial juridical person) or 
•  Corporations, in aggregate (eg. Companies). 
•  Officers of corporations- 
•  Positive effect of section 11- [Syndicate Transport Co. (1963) 66 Bom LR 197] 
Corporations  may  be  criminally  liable.  Section  11  is  safeguard  when  a  corporation  tends  to  become 
victim of an offence, lead offender sentence to imprisonment. 
Negative effect of section 11- [Girdharilal V Lal chand 1970 Cr. LJ 987 (Raj.)] 
Corporation can be punished, only if offence is punishable with fine. 
•  Criminal  liability  of  Directors  and  officers:  Technically,  offenders  is  a  corporation,  director  may  be 
liable (on addition to the criminal liability of the corporation), under- 
1.  Section  107  and  108,  IPC-  If  directors  or  officers tend  to  be  participants  in  the  offence  amounts  to 
abatement. 
2.  Some special Acts- Directors and other officers could be charged of affairs of corporation for conduct 
of affairs declared criminally liable unless they can prove that the offence was committed without their 
knowledge or they exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of that offence. 
3.  Criminal  liability of partners: 
[Sham Sundar V State of Haryana, (Judgment dated 21 August, JT 1989(3) SC 523 
Supreme  Court  held,  reference  to  section  10  of  the  Essential  Commodities  Act,  1955,  only  a  partner 
liable and responsible for conducting, the business of the firm could be convicted unless he proves the 
contravention  took  place  without  her  knowledge  or  the  exercised  all  due  diligence  tom  prevent  such 
contravention. 
SECTION 12– “Public”- 
Includes any class of public or any community, any company, whether incorporated or not. 
SECTION 14– “Servant Government”- 

Page 59 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Any officer or servant: 
1.  Continues appointment or 
2.  Get employed in India by or under the authority of Government. 
SECTION 17- “Government” 
1.  The Central Government or 
2.  Government of the State. 
SECTION 18– “India” 
Territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Highlights: 
1.  Relatable  to  section-  108A,  121A,  359,  360,  etc  of  this  Code  and  intended  to  be  connoted  by  those 
sections, where territorial effect is crucial element. 
2.  This section is not Indian as political entity, but geographical territory. 
3.  It would have been more expressive it began something like this, “India” in relation to the territory. 
SECTION 19– “Judge” 
Not only every person officially designated as judge or who is one of a body of persons if empowered by 
law to give judgments (given below), but also every person empowered by law, to give- 
1.  Any legal proceeding, civil or criminal or 
2.  Definitive judgment by law to give in any legal proceedings , civil or criminal or 
3.  Definitive judgment or judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive. 
Highlights                     
Judge OR not? 
•  A collector exercising jurisdiction, in suit under 10 of 1859, is judge. 
•  A magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of charge on which he has power to sentence to fine or 
imprisonment, with or without appeal, is judge. 
•  A  member  of  panchayat,  power  under  Regulation-  VII,  1810  of  Madras  Code  to  try  and  determine 
suits, is judge. 
•  A magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of charge on  which he  has power only to committee 
for trial to another court, not a judge. 
SECTION 20– “Court of Justice” 
When the following person judicially- 
1.  A judge, who is empowered by law to act judicially alone and 
2.  A body of judges, empowered by law to act judicially as a body. 
Highlights 
A panchayat acting under Regulation VII, 1816 of Madaras, having power to try and determine suit, is a 
court of Justice. 
SECTION 21 “Public Servant”                                  
A person falling under any of the below description- 
• Every commissioned officer in Military, Navy or Air Force of India ; 
• Every  judge  or  any  person  empowered  by  law  to  discharge  my  adjudicatory  functions  by  himself  or 
member anybody of person; 
• Every officer of Overt (not hidden or open) of Justice (including liquidator, receiver or commissioner) 
whose duty is: 
• to investigate or report any matter of law or fact, 
• to make, authenticate or keep any document, 
• to administer any oath, 
• to interpret or preserve order in court, 
• specially authorized by court of justice to perform any of such duties. 
• Every jury man, assessor or member of panchayat (assisting Court of Justice or public servant); 
• Every  arbitrator  or  other  person  (referred  for  decision  or  report  by  any  Court  of  Justice  or  other 
competent one); 
• Every person, holding any office by virtue (empowered to keep any person in confinement); 

Page 60 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• Every person of the Government, under duty of- 
• Preventing offences or 
• Giving information of offences or 
• Bringing offenders to justice or 
• To protect public health, safety or convenience; 
• Every officer, whose duty on behalf of the Government is to- 
• Take, receive, keep or expand any property, 
• Make survey, assessment or contract, 
• Execute any revenue process, 
• Execute any revenue process, 
• Investigate or report any matter affection the pecuniary interest of Government, 
• Prevent infraction of any law for pecuniary interest of Government; 
• Every person, whose duty as an officer is to- 
• Take, receive, keep or expend any property, 
• Make  any  survey  or  assessment  or  to  levy  any  rate  or  tax  for  any  secular  common  purpose  of  any 
village, town or district, 
• Make,  authenticate  or  keep  any  document  for  ascertaining  of  the  right  of  the  people  of  any  village, 
town or district; 
• Every person (as miscellaneous)- 
• In service or pay of the Government or remuneration by fees or commission for performance of any 
public duty by the Government, 
• In service or pay of local authority, a corporation established by or under a central, provincial or state 
Act or Government company (section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956). 
Highlight 
• A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant. 
• Public servants mentioned in section 34, may be appointed by Government or not. 
• A public servant may be under legal defect in his right to hold the situation. 
• “Election” denotes selecting members of a Legislative, municipal or other public authority. 
• Public servant OR not- 
• Bank employee- Certain specific bank employee, if legislature wants. 
• Banks- Nationalized bank’s employee is a public servant, being employee of a Government company or 
Corporation controlled by Government of India. 
• President and Secretary of cooperative society- Not a public servant. 
• Private Medical Practitioner- Not public servant even if their names are included in panel of doctors. 
• Surveyor- Surveyor of Insurance claim does not fall under this section. 
• MP- Public servant under section (2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
• MLA – Not a public servant 
• Minister – Are public servant as they: 
• Receive ‘pay’, an expression wider than salary. 
• Appointed by the Governor (Article 164 and 167 of the Constitution of India) 
• Perform public functions. 
• Co-operative  societies-  These  are  not  owned  or  controlled  by  the  state.  Their  officers  are  not  public 
servants, not even those on deputation form Government. 
SECTION 22– “Movable Property” 

Corporate Property of every description, except- 
1. 
Land and thing attached to the earth and 
2. 
Things fastened to anything which is attached to the earth. 

SECTION 23 – “Wrongful gain” 
• “Wrongful gain”-gain by unlawful means of property to which person gaining is legally entitled. 
• “Wrongful loss”- Loss by unlawful means of property to which person losing it is legally entitled. 
• Gaining wrongfully – Person said to gain wrongfully, when retains as well as acquired wrongfully 

Page 61 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• Losing wrongfully – Person said to loss wrongfully, when kept out as well as deprived wrongfully. 
SECTION 24-“Dishonestly”-Anything done with an intent of causing wrongful gain to one and wrongful 
loss to another. 
Highlight 
Concealment amounts to dishonesty. 
SECTION 25– “Fraudulent”- Anything said with an intent to defraud, not anything else. 
Highlight 
1.  Pecuniary advantage or harm is unnecessary (fraudulent need not to be dishonest) 
2.  Fraud requires deceiving, but not wrongful gain or loss. 
3.  No fraud, if neither deceived, nor dishonesty. 
SECTION 26- “Reason to believe”- There is ‘reason to believe’, only if there is sufficient cause to believe 
it. 
SECTION 27– Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant 
When wife, clerk or servant is in account of that person. 
Highlight 
1.  Clerk or servant- Person temporarily employed, on particular occasion in capacity of clerk or servant. 
2.  ‘On account to that person ‘- Being accountable to that person (to whom they are accountable), not 
being property in control of them (here, wife specifically) 
3.  Possession in English Criminal Law- Possession requires mental element.”A person cannot be said to 
be in possession of some article which he or she does not realize in or may in her handbag, room, etc, 
over which he has control”. 
SECTION 28- “Counterfeit”- To create resemblance, with an intent to deceive. 
Highlight 
1.  Resemblance or imitation does not need to be exact. 
2.  Until a person is proved counterfeiting, he is presumed to be deceived as if resemblance has been an 
issue of his own deception. 
SECTION 29- “Document”- 
1.  Letter,  figure  or  marks  express  matter  (materialistic  content  like,  terms  and  conditions)  upon  a 
substance (actual matter over which terms and conditions are made). 
2.  When those letter, figure or  mark, is  later on  used as evidence, whether it is intently created to be 
evidence later on or not, is called document. 
Highlight 
•  Immaterial facts- 
• Substance of document or 
• Means of expression (letter or figure or mark) or 
• Intent to create evidence, to be later on presented in Court of Justice. 
• Writing  expressing  terms  of  contract,  may  be  used  as  evidence  of  the  contract,  is  document.  For 
example- 
• Cheque upon a banker, 
• Power of attorney, 
• Map or plan, intended to be used as evidence, 
• Directions or instructions in writing. 
• Letter or figure or marks, is deemed to be expressed for this Act, as what has been explained about it 
in the mercantile or other usage, whether it itself express it or not. Example- negotiable instrument is 
construed  for  “Pay  to  the  holder”  agenda,  according  to  mercantile  usage.  So  whether  it  is  been 
mentioned over it or not, still be impliedly taken that way, for the purpose of this section also. 
SECTION 29A-“Electronic record”- In accordance with section 2 (1) (t) of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000. 
SECTION 30-“Valuable security”- 
An  alleged  document  which  tends  to  acknowledge  any  person,  of  his  legal  liability  against  it  or  legal 
right, which is being created, extended, transferred, retreated, released or extinguished through it. 

Page 62 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Highlight 
• Example- bill of exchange, when endorsement intends to transfer the right within. 
• Essential conditions of valuable security, is generating legal right or legal liability. 
• Exception:  “release”  through  document,  because  it  asserts  (declares)  rights,  not  abandon  (release) 
rights. 
• Applicability under this Act: Offences against- 
• Human body (section 329- 331, 347, 348), 
• Property (section 420) 
• Documents (section 467, 471) 
• Conflict of being valuable security OR not- 
• Unregistered document (which is not fully effective until registered), is not valuable security in strict 
sense but allegedly valuable security, so falls- 
• Under section 467 (forgery of valuable security) and 
• Even amounts to an offence of cheating depending upon the conduct. 
• Exception of section 467- An alleged document is a copy of valuable security. 
SECTION 31-“A will”- A testamentary document. 
Highlight 
Comparing section 31, IPC with section 2(h) of Indian succession Act (39 of 1925). 
‘Legal declaration, when testator intents to declare his desire regarding his property, to be carried into 
effect even after his death. 
• Forgery of will- Liability under section 467, IPC. 
SECTION 32- words referring to acts include Illegal omissions 
• In code, words referring to ‘act’ done, also means of offender undergoing illegal omission. 
• Exception- any contradictory intention of the circumstance. 
• “act”- Under jurisprudence, any even subject to human will 
• Act provides with- 
• Its origin in some mental or bodily activity of door, 
• Its circumstances and 
• Its consequences. 
• Omission  will  be  subject  to  code,  if  act  committed  will  be  illegal.  But  omission  needs  not  to  be 
intentional. That’s why, an intentional omission does not concern the code because then it would be a 
conscious illegal conduct. 
• Conditional conduct: 
• Care: 
• Omission to take care is punishable, if there is duty to take care. 
• Exception- omission to ct with care is excused, if that act was product of ‘mental blackout’. 
• Volunteer: 
• Conduct not punishable if, influenced by: Fits or sleep walking 
• Holmes said “an act is always a voluntary muscular contraction and nothing else”. 
SECTION 33– “Act”, “omission” 
1.  “Act”- even involves series of acts, as single act. 
2.  “Omission”- even involves series of omissions, as single omission. 
Highlight 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
SECTION 34– Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention 
Criminal act conducted by several persons, with common intention to each of them, each of such person 
will be liable in the same manner, as of it has been conducted by him alone. 
Highlights 

A single positive act. 
Series of acts. 
Single illegal omission. 
Series of illegal omissions. 

Page 63 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Principle- 
As the intention is common the liability should also be common 
Relevant cases– 
Ganesh singh V Ram Rafie (1869) S3 Bom. LR (Privycouncil) 44, 45 
B.N.Sirkantiah V State, AIR 1958 SCD 672 
Viswanth Sghanthamallappa Dhule V State of Karnataka , AIR 1998 SC 24 
Nature of liability- 
Liability of each one involved, as participation in the criminal act with common intention, not a liability 
as abettor (helper) but as a principal (authoritarian). 
Relevant case- Nga Aung Thein, 1935 ILR 13 RANG (210) 
Essentials- 
2 essentials, absence of one could fail to prove a person guilty: 
Participation in the act (participant of an offence) 
Common intention. 
Relevant cases- 
Inderjity V State, 1986 CVr. LHJ 966(Del) 
Dasrathal V State of Gujrat, 1979 Cr LJ 1078 (SC)Applicability of- 
Applicability– 
Importance of common intent: 
The court has to take recourse(help) of this section even if not mentioned, when the assistant( attacker) 
is found to be involved with accused due to common intent. 
Relevant case– Dhanna V State of Madhya Pradesh< AIR 1996 SC 2478 
Cumulative effect: 
If cumulative effect of injuries, seems sufficient as an ordinary course to cause death. 
Relevant case– State of Assam V Siba Prasad Bora 1985 Cr LJ 43(Gau) 
Labha singh V State of Punjab AIR 1998 SC 323 

Pre-meeting of mind (common intent): 
There must be pre-arranged plan and meeting of minds, such if it develops on the spot. So, to come up 
with  their  common  intent,  it  is  relevant  to  be  bothered  about  accused  preceding  and  following 
occurrence. 
Relevant case– Domu Chopali V State 1986(2) Cr. LC 261(Orissa) 

Heat of the moment conduct: 
When  accused,  acted  in  heat  of  moment  and  was  on  bail  for  years,  sentence  reduced  from  (RI) 
Regorious Imprisonment of 3years to 1.5 years. 
Relevant case– Rajendra Prasade V State of Bihar AIR 1987 SC 1335 

Surrender, not sufficient: 
If  appellant  surrenders  along  with  accused  before  police,  does  not  satisfy  meeting  of  minds  and  so, 
section 34 cannot cover such situation. 
Relevant case– Rangaswami V State of Tamil Nadu AIR 1989 SC 1137 

Common intent of accused: 
An offence committed is product of common intent of 2 or more accused, everyone is guilty. 
Relevant case-State of Punjab V Surjit Singh AIR 1987 SC 1045 

Accused guilt: 
Conviction will justified if there is no inference except having an accused with guilt. 
Relevant case– Basanti V State of Himachal Pradesh AIR 1987 SC 1572 

Page 64 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Suspicion, is no proof: 
Suspicion against accused, cannot take place of proof. 
Relevant case– Basanti V State of Himachal Pradesh AIR 1987 SC 1572 

Every accuse, indulge in overt act, not necessary: 
To convict a person to vicarious liability under section 34 or 149, it is not necessary for them to indulge 
in overt act. 
Relevant case– Rambilas Singh V State of Bihar AIR 1989 SC 1593 
Common intent, at spurt (sudden or speedy) of moment: 
Common  intent  is to  establish,  by processing  their shared  intention,  even  if  it  is  result  of  spurt  of the 
moment. 
Relevant case- Maqsoodan V State of Uttar Pradesh AIR 1983 SC 126 
Sharing of common intent– 
Common intent gets inferred: 
If second accused, secured the deceased and first accused stabbed him. 
Relevant case- 
Bachitar singh V State ( Delhi Administration) AIR 1998 SC 246 
Some accused committed assault on deceased, all of accused cannot be held liable for conviction: 
Relevant case– Dukhmochan Pandey V State of Bihar AIR 1998 S 40 
Benefit of doubt– 
Once intent proved, conduct of others not: 
Intent  of  one  accuse  is  proved,  but  others  conduct  is  not  yet  proved.  Benefit  of  doubt  in  such  case 
reduced sentence to 5 years. 
Relevant case– Ranapartap V State of Haryana, AIR 1983 SC 680 
Witness’s description, doesn’t tally accused: 
Accused lead the case, entered house, armed with gun, participated in murder of deceased. 
Relevant case– Lokpal Sigh V State Madhya Pradesh AIR 1985 SC 891 

Appellant’s involvement as participant in crime: 

Appellant participation in crime, in manner that looted properties were distributed among them. 

Relevant case-Mukund Kundu Mishjra V State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1997 SC 2622 
Evidence of eye witness, cannot prove participation in an offence and cannot be turned off under benefit of 
doubt: 

All  accused  are  acquitted  as  evidence  of  eye  witness,  did  not  prove  their  participation  in  the 
offense of murder. Main accused cannot be given benefit of doubt on the same grou8nd. Benefit of doubt 
cannot be given by proving an eye witness totally false and absolutely unreliable. 
Relevant case– Jarnail singh V State of Punjab AIR 1996 SC 755 
SECTION 35– when such an act is criminal by reason of it’s being done with a criminal knowledge or 
intention 
Each of such persons who join in the act with such knowledge or intention is liability for the act in the 
same manner as if the act is done by him alone with the knowledge or intention. 
SECTION 36– Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission 
Where an offence is, when someone by an act or by an omission causing effect or attempt to cause that 
effect,  in  case,  cause  of  effect  or  attempt  to  cause  that  effect  is  partly  by  an  act  and  partly  by  an 
omission, it is even an offense. 
Example;  A  intentionally  caused  Z’s  death,  partly  by  illegally  omitting  to  give  Z  food  and  partly  by 
beating Z, A has committed murder. 
SECTION 37– Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence. 
Offence committed through several acts, wherever intentionally co-operates in commission of offences 
by  doing  any  one  of  those  act  either  singly  or  jointly  with  any  other  person,  has  said  to  commit  that 
offence. 

Page 65 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

SECTION 38– Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offences. 
When several persons are engaged or concerned in commission of criminal act, everyone could be guilt 
of different offences by means of that act. 
Example: 
A and B, killed Z; Under grave provocation that it would only amount to culpable homicide, will only be 
guilty of culpable homicide. 
B- Having ill will towards Z and without any subject to provocation, killed Z, will be guilty of murder. 
SECTION 39- ” Voluntarily”- A person is sad to cause an effect “voluntarily”- 
• If he intended to cause it and 
• At time of employing means, he knows or reasonable believe in causing it. 
Highlight 
Sense of guilt, of the cause, doesn’t matter if above give conditions are fulfilled. 
SECTION 40- “Offence” – 
Denotes a thing made punishable by this code; 
Under section 64, 65, 66, 67, 71, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 
221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the word ‘offence’, is this 
punishable under the special or local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment for a term of 
6 months or upwards, whether with or without fine. 
 SECTION 41– “Special law”- Applicable to a particular subject . 
SECTION 42– “Local law”- applicable only to, particular part of India. 
SECTION 43“Illegal”, “Legally bound to do”- 
• “Illegal”- everything which is offensive, prohibited by law or furnished ground for a civil action. 
• “Legally bound to do”- a person illegal to omit something, doesn’t matter what exactly. 
SECTION 44– “Injury”- 
 Any harm illegally caused to any person in- 
• Body or 
• Mind or 
• Reputation or 
• Property. 
SECTION 45-” Life”- 
Explained  by  word  “Life”,  as  life  of  a  human  being  is  life  unless  anything  contrary  appears  from  the 
circumstances. 
SECTION 46– “Death”- 
Explained by word “Death”, as death of a human being is death unless anything contrary appears from 
the circumstances. 
SECTION 47-“Animal”- Any living creature, other than human being. 
SECTION 48– “Vessel”- Anything made for conveyance (process for transportation) of human being, or 
property by water. 
SECTION 49-“Year”,”Month”- wherever the word “year” or “month” is used, it is to be understood that 
the year or the month is to be reckoned according to the British calendar. 
SECTION  50–  “Section”-  It  denotes  one  of  those  portions  of  a  chapter  of  this  code  which  are 
distinguished by prefixed numeral figures. 
SECTION 51-“Oath”- 
It includes: 
• A solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath or 
• Any declaration required or authorized by law to be made before a public servant or 
• To be used for the purpose of proof, whether in Court of Justice or not. 
SECTION  52–  “Good  faith”-  Nothing  is  said  to  be  done  or  believed  in  “good  faith”  which  is  done  or 
believed without due care and attention. 
SECTION 52 A- “Harbor” 
To evade apprehension, when a person is: 

Page 66 of 149 

 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• Supplied with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance or 
• Assisting with above mentioned things or not. 

2.3 General Exceptions 
IPC Chapter IV: Sections 76 – 106 

In  another  landmark  judgment,  the  Supreme  Court  criminalized  sex  with  a  minor  wife  aged 
between 15 and 18 years. The court overturned an exception in rape law which allowed a husband to 
have  sex  with  his  wife  aged  15  years  and  above  regardless  of  consent,  including  punishment.  NGO 
Independent  Thought  filed  a  PIL  in  court  which  paved  the  way  for  this  ruling  and  this  rule  will  be 
applicable even in the case of Muslim Personal law. Criminal law deals with such type of cases in India 
which are assorted in different sections depending upon their nature. 

The Criminal law covers various punishments which vary from case to case. But it is not always 
necessary that a person gets punished for a crime which he/she had committed. The Indian Penal Code 
(IPC),  1860  recognizes  defences  in  Chapter  IV  under  “General  Exceptions”.  Section  76  to  106  covers 
these  defences  which  are  based  on  the  presumption  that  a  person  is  not  liable  for  the  crime 
committed.  These defences depend upon the circumstances prevailing at that point of time, mens rea of 
person and reasonability of action of that accused. 

Object of Chapter IV 

Every  offence  is  not  absolute,  they  have  certain  exceptions.  When  IPC  was  drafted,  it  was 
assumed  that  there  were  no  exceptions in  criminal  cases  which  were  a  major  loophole. So a  separate 
Chapter IV was introduced by the makers of the Code applicable to the entire concept. 
In short, the object of Chapter IV includes: 

• Exceptional circumstances in which an individual can escape liability. 
• Making Code construction simpler by removing the repetition of criminal exceptions. 

Burden of Proof 

• Generally, Prosecution has to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt against the accused. 
• Before the enforcement of the Indian Evidence Act 1882, the prosecution had to prove that the 
case does not fall under any exception, but section 105 of Evidence act shifted the burden on 
the claimant. 

• But  in  exceptions,  as  per Section  105 of  Evidence  Act,  a  claimant  has  to  prove  the  existence  of 

general exception in crimes. 

The fabric of Chapter IV 
• Section 6 of IPC 

“Throughout this code, every definition of offence, every penal provision and every illustration of every 
such definition or penal provision, shall be understood subject to exceptions contained in the chapter 
titled General Exceptions”. 
The General Exceptions are divided into 2 categories: 

• Excusable Acts 
• Judicially Justifiable Acts 
Excusable Acts 
A  mistake  of  Fact  under 
section 76 and 79. 
Accident under Section 80.  The necessity under 81. 
Infancy  –  Section  82  and 
83. 
Insanity – Section 84. 
Intoxication  –  Section  85 
and 86. 

Duress under Section 94. 

Justifiable Act 
An act of Judge and Act performed in pursuance of 
an order under Section 77 and 78. 

Consent under Section 87 – 89 and Section 90 and 
92. 
Communication under Section 93. 

Page 67 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Trifles under Section 95. 
Private Defence under Section 96 – 106. 

Excusable Acts 

An Excusable Act is the one in which though the person had caused harm, yet that person should 
be excused because he cannot be blamed for the act. For example, if a person of unsound mind commits 
a  crime,  he  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  that  because  he  was  not  having  mens  rea.  Same  goes  for 
involuntary intoxication, insanity, infancy or honest mistake of fact. 
A mistake of Fact under Section 76 and 79 

Under Section 76: Act done by a person bound or by mistake of fact believing, himself to be bound 
by law in included. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is or by reason of a mistake of 
fact, not by mistake of law in good faith believes himself, to be, bound by law to do such act. It is derived 
from the legal maxim “ignorantia facti doth excusat, ignorantia juris non excusat”. 

• Example:  If  a  soldier  firing  on  a  mob  by  the  order  of  his  officer  in  conformity  through  the 

command of the law, then he will not be liable. 

Under Section 79: Act done by a person justified or by mistake of fact believing, himself justified, by law 
is included. Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason 
of mistake of fact and not mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in doing 
that particular act 

• Example: A thought Z to be a murderer and in good faith and justified by law, seizes Z to present 

him before authority. A has not committed any offence. 

Case law for Section 79 
In Kiran Bedi v. Committee of Inquiry, petitioner  refused  to  deposed  to  the  beginning  of  the  inquiry  as 
she believed that she could depose only at the end of the inquiry 
Accident under Section 80 

Includes an Accident committed while doing a lawful act. Nothing is an offence which is done by 
accident  or  misfortune,  without  any  criminal  intention  or  knowledge  in  the  doing  of  a  lawful  act  in  a 
lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution. 

• Example:  Suppose M is trying to shoot a bird with a gun but unfortunately the bullet reflected 

from the oak tree causing harm to N, then, M will not be liable. 

Case law for Section 80 
In King  Emperor  v.  Timmappa, a  division  bench  held  that  shooting  with  an  unlicensed  gun  does  not 
debar an accused from claiming defence under Section 81 of IPC. The appeal of acquittal was dismissed 
and the order of trial magistrate was upheld. The court was of the opinion that there is no reason why 
sentence awarded under Section 19(e) of the Indian Arms Act should be enhanced. The respondent was 
liable under the provision but no more. He just borrowed a gun for few minutes to kill as he thought a 
wild animal might attack him and his partners. The application was dismissed regarding enhancement 
of sentence. 

Infancy – Section 82 and 83 
Section 82: It includes an act of a child below seven years of age. Nothing is an offence which is done by 
a child under seven years of age. 

• Suppose a child below seven years of age, pressed the trigger of the gun and caused the death of 

his father, then, the child will not be liable. 

Section  83:  It  includes  an  act  of  a  child  above  seven  and  below  twelve  of  immature  understanding. 
Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not 
yet attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge the nature and repercussions of his conduct 
during that occasion. 

• Example:  Suppose a child of 10 years killed his father with a gun in the shadow of immaturity, 

he will not be liable if he has not attained maturity. 

Page 68 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Case law for Section 83 
In Krishna  Bhagwan  v.  State  of  Bihar,  Patna  High  Court  upheld  that  if  a  child  who  is  accused  of  an 
offence  during  the  trial,  has  attained  the  age  of  seven  years  or  at  the  time  of  decision  the  child  has 
attained  the  age  of  seven  years  can  be  convicted  if  he  has  the  understanding  an  knowledge  of  the 
offence committed by him. 

Insanity – Section 84 

Act  of  a  person  of  unsound  mind.   Nothing  is  an  offence  which  is  done  by  a  person  who  at  that 
time of performing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, 
or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. 

• Example: A, who is insane or unsound, killed B with a knife, thinking it to be a fun game, will not 
be liable for B’s death as he was not aware of the nature of act and law. he was incapable of 
thinking judiciously. 

Case law for Section 84 
In Ashiruddin  Ahmed  vs.  State,  the  accused  Ashiruddin  was  commanded  by  someone  in  paradise  to 
sacrifice his own son, aged 4 years. Next morning he took his son to a Mosque and killed him and then 
went straight to us uncle, but finding a chowkidar, took the uncle nearby a tank and told him the story. 
The Supreme Court opined that the accused can claim the defence as even though he knew the nature of 
the act, he did not know what was wrong. 

Intoxication – Section 85 and 86 
Section  85:  Act  of  a  person  incapable  of  judgment  by  reason  of  intoxication  caused  against  his  will. 
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, 
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law, 
provided  that  the  thing  which  intoxicated  him  was  administered  involuntarily  without  his  will  or 
knowledge. 

• Example: A drank alcohol given by a friend thinking it to be a cold drink. He became intoxicated 
and  hit  a  person  on  driving  his  car  back  home.  He  will  not  be  liable  as  alcohol  was 
administered to him without his will and knowledge. 

Section  86:  Offence  requiring  a  particular  intent  or  knowledge  committed  by  one  who  is  intoxicated. 
This applies to cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or 
intent, a person who does the act in state of intoxication, shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the 
same  knowledge  as  he  would  have  had  if  he  had  not  been  intoxicated,  unless  the  thing  which 
intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. 

• Example:  A  person  intoxicated,  stabs  another  person  under  influence  of  alcohol  which  was 
administered to him in the party against his knowledge or will, will  not be liable. But if that 
person had stabbed that person under voluntary intoxication, then he will be liable. 

Case law for Section 86 
In Babu Sadashiv Jadhav case, the accused was drunk and fought with the wife. He poured kerosene and 
set her on fire and started extinguishing the fire. The court held that he intended to cause bodily injury 
which  was  likely  to  cause  death  under  section  299(20  and  sentenced  h  under  section  304,  Part  I  of 
code). 
Justifiable Acts 
A justified act is one which would have been wrongful under normal conditions but the circumstances 
under which the act was committed makes it tolerable and acceptable. 
Act of Judge and Act performed in pursuance of an order under Section 77 and 78 
Section  77:  Act  of  Judge  when  acting  judicially.  Nothing  is  an  offence  which  is  done  by  a  judge  when 
acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to 
him by law. 

Page 69 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• Example:  Giving  Capital  Punishment  to  Ajmal  Kasab  was  done  under  the  judicial  powers  of 

judges. 

Section  78:  Act  done  pursuant  to  the  Judgement  or  order  of  the  court.  Nothing  which  is  done  in 
pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a court of justice, if done whilst such 
judgment or order remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the court may have no jurisdiction to 
pass such judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the court had 
such jurisdiction. 

• Example: A judge passing an order of giving lifetime jail punishment, believing in good faith that 

the court has jurisdiction, will not be liable. 

Necessity under 81 
Act  likely  to  cause  harm,  but  done  without  criminal  intent,  and  to  prevent  other  harm.  Nothing  is  an 
offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm if it is done 
without  any  criminal  intention  to  cause  harm,  and  in  good  faith  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  or 
avoiding other harm to person or property. 

• Example: A Captain of a ship turned the direction of the ship of 100 people in order to save their 
lives, but harming the life of 30 people of a small boat, without any intention or negligence or 
fault on his part. He will not be liable because necessity is a condition in which a person causes 
small harm to avoid great harm. 

Case law for Section 81 
In Bishambher v. Roomal,  1950,  the  complainant  Bishambhara  had  molested  a  girl  Nathia.  Khacheru, 
Mansukh,  and  Nathu  were  accused  related  to  father  of  the  girl.  The  Chamars  were  agitated  and 
determined to punish Bhishambher. Rumal Singh, Fateh Singh, and Balwant Singh intervened and tried 
to bring a settlement. They collected a panchayat and the complainant’s black was blackened and given 
shoe beating. It was found by the court that accused had intervened in good faith but the panchayat was 
having no authority to take such a step. 

Consent under Section 87 – 89 and Section 92 
Section  87:  Act  not  intended  and  not  known  to  be  likely  to  cause  death  or  grievous  hurt,  done  by 
consent. Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the 
doer which is likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may 
cause,  or  to  be  intended  by  the  doer  to  cause,  to  any  person,  above  18  years  of  age,  who  has  given 
consent,  whether  express  or  implied,  to  suffer  that  harm;  or  by  reason  of  any  harm  which  it  may  be 
known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to that risk of harm. 

• Example: A and E agreed to fence each other for enjoyment. This agreement implies the consent 
of each other to suffer harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul 
play and if A while playing fairly hurts E, then A, has committed no offence. 

Case law for Section 87 
In Poonai Fattemah v. Emp, the accused who professed to be a snake charmer, induced the deceased to 
believe  him  that  he  the  power  to  protect  him  from  any  harm  caused  by  the  snake  bite.  The  deceased 
believed him and got bitten by the snake and died. The defence of consent was rejected. 
Section 88: Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person’s benefit. Nothing, 
which  is  not  intended  to  cause  death,  is  an  offence  by  reason  of  any  harm  which  it  may  cause,  or  be 
intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose 
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or implied to suffer that 
harm, or to take the risk of that harm. 
Case law for Section 88 
In R.P Dhanda V. Bhurelal, the appellant, a medical doctor, performed an eye operation for cataract with 
patient’s  consent.  The operation  resulted  in  the  loss  of  eyesight.  The  doctor  was  protected  under  this 
defence as he acted in good faith. 

Page 70 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 89: Act  done in good faith for the benefit of a child or insane person, by or by consent of the 
guardian.  Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or 
of unsound mind, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person having 
lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by 
the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person 
Section  92:  Act  done  in  good  faith  for  benefit  of  a  person  without  consent.  Nothing  is  an  offence  by 
reason  of  any  harm  which  it  may  causes  to  a  person  for  whose  benefit  it  is  done  in  good  faith,  even 
without  that  person’s  consent,  if  the  circumstances  are  such  that  it  is  impossible  for  that  person  to 
signify consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in 
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with 
benefit. 
Section 90: Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. A consent is not such a consent as 
is intended by any section of this Code, 

1.  if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and if 
the  person  doing  the  act  knows,  or  has  reason  to  believe,  that  the  consent  was  given  in 
consequence of such fear or misconception; or 

2.  Consent of insane person if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, 
or intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives 
his consent; or 

3.  Consent of children, the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person 

who is under twelve years of age. 

Case law for Section 90 
In Jakir Ali v. State of Assam, it was proved beyond doubt that the accused had sexual intercourse with 
the victim on a false promise of marriage. The Gauhati High Court held that submission of the body by a 
woman  under  fear  or  misconception  of  fact  cannot  be  construed  as  consent  and  so  conviction  of  the 
accused under sections 376 and 417 of the Indian Penal Code was proper. 
Section  91:  Exclusion  of  acts  which  are  offences  independently  of  harm  caused.  The exceptions  in 
sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they 
may cause, or be intended to cause or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, 
or on whose behalf the consent is given. 
Communication under Section 93 
Communication  made  in  good  faith.  No  communication  made  in  good  faith  is  an  offence  by  reason  of 
any harm to the person to whom it is made if it is made for the benefit of that person. 

• Example:  A  doctor  in  good  faith  tells  the  wife  that  her  husband  has  cancer  and  his  life  is  in 
danger.  The  wife  died  of  shock  after  hearing  this.  The  doctor  will  not  be  liable  because  he 
communicated this news in good faith. 

Duress under Section 94 
Act to which a person is compelled by threats. Except murder, and offences against the state punishable 
with death, nothing is an offence which done by a person compelled to do it under threats, which, at the 
time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise be 
the  consequence,  provided  the  person  doing  the  act  did  not  of  his  own  accord,  or  from  reasonable 
apprehension  of  harm  to  himself  short  of  instant  death,  place  himself  in  the  situation  by  which  he 
became subject to such constraint. 

• Example:  A  was  caught  by  a  gang  of  dacoits  and  was  under  fear  of  instant  death.  He  was 
compelled to take gun and forced to open the door of house for entrance of dacoits and harm 
the family. A will not be guilty of offence under duress. 

Page 71 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Trifles under Section 95 
Act causing slight harm is included under this section. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or 
that it is intended to cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm if that harm is so slight 
that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm. 
Case law for Section 95 
In Mrs.  Veeda  Menezes  v.  Khan, during  the  course  of  exchange  of  high  tempers  and  abusive  words 
between appellant’s husband and the respondent, the latter threw a file of papers at the former which 
hit the appellant causing a scratch on the elbow. SC said that the harm caused was slight and hence, not 
guilty. 

Private Defence under Section 96 – 106 
Section 96: Things done in private defence. 
Nothing is an offence in which a person harms another person in the exercise of private defence. 
Section 97: Right of private defence of body and property.   
Every person has a right to private defence, provided under reasonable restriction under Section 99. 

1.  Protecting his body or another person’s body, against any offence in which there is a danger to 

life. 

2.  Protecting  his  or  another  person’s  movable  or  immovable  property,  against  any  offence  like 
theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass or an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief 
or criminal trespass. 

• Example: A father, in order to protect the life of daughter from the attack of a thief, shoots him in 

his leg. But the father will not be liable as he was protecting the life of his daughter. 

Case law for Section 97 
In Akonti Bora v. State of Assam,  the  Gauhati  High  Court  held  that  while  exercising  the  right  of  private 
defence of property the act of dispossession or throwing out a trespasser includes right to throw away 
the material objects also with which the trespass has been committed. 
Section 98: Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind etc. 
When an act which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the 
want  of  maturity  of  understanding,  the  unsoundness  of  mind  or  the  intoxication  of  the  person  doing 
that act, or by reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right 
of private defence against that act which he would have if the act were that offence. 

• Example:  A  attempts  to  kill  Z  under  influence  of  insanity  but  A  is  not  guilty.  Z  can  exercise 

private defence to protect himself from A. 

Section 99: Acts against which there is no right of private defence. 

• There  is  no  right  of  private  defence  against  an  act  which  does  not  reasonably  cause  the 

apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or 

• Attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under color of his office, though 

that act may not be strictly justifiable by law. 

• There  is  no  right  of  private  defence  against  an  act  which  does  not  reasonably  cause  the 

apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or 

• Attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his 

office though that direction may not be strictly Justifiable by law. 

• There  is  no  right  of  private  defence  in  cases  in  which  there  is  time  to  have  recourse  to  the 

protection of the public authorities. 

• The harm caused should be proportional to that of imminent danger or attack. 

Case law for Section 99 
In Puran  Singh  v.  State  of  Punjab,  the  Supreme  Court  observed  that  where  there  is  an  element  of 
invasion  or  aggression  on  the  property  by  a  person  who  has  no  right  of  possession,  then  there  is 
obviously no room to have recourse to the public authorities and the accused has the undoubted right 
to resist the attack and use even force, if necessary. 

Page 72 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 100: When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death. 

• Assault causing reasonable apprehension of death. 
• Reasonable apprehension of grievous hurt. 
• Committing rape 
• Unnatural lust 
• Kidnapping or abducting 
• Wrongfully confining a person in which that person reasonably apprehends the assault and not 

able to contact public authority. 

• Act of throwing or attempting to throw acid, causing apprehension in the mind that assault will 

cause grievous hurt. 

Case law for Section 100 
In Yogendra Morarji v. state, the SC discussed in detail the extent and limitations of the right of private 
defence  of  the  body.  There  must  be  no  safe  or  reasonable  mode  of  escape  any  retreat  for  the  person 
confronted with imminent peril to life or bodily harm except by inflicting death. 
Section 101: When such rights extend to causing any harm other than death. 
If  the  offence  be  not  of  any  of  the  descriptions  enumerated  in  the  last  preceding  section,  the  right  of 
private defence of the body does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does 
extend, under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any 
harm other than death. 
Case law for Section 101 
In Dharmindar v. State of Himachal Pradesh, that onus of proof to establish the right of private defence is 
not as onerous as that of a prosecution to prove its case. Where the facts and circumstances lead to a 
preponderance of probabilities in favor of the defence case it would be enough to discharge the burden 
to prove the case of self-defence. 

Section 102: Commencement and continuance the right of private defence of the body. 
The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to 
the body arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been 
committed; it continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues.1 

• Example: A, B, and C were chasing D to kill him in order to take revenge, but suddenly they saw a 
policeman coming from another side. They got afraid and turned back to run. But D shoots B 
in his leg, even when there was no imminent danger of harm. D will be liable as there was no 
apprehension of death or risk of danger. 

Section 103: When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death. 

1.  Robbery; 
2.  House-breaking by night; 
3.  Mischief  by  fire  committed  on  any  building,  tent  or  vessel,  building,  tent  or  vessel  used  as  a 

human dwelling, or a place for the custody of property; 

4.  Theft,  mischief,  or  house-trespass,  under  such  circumstances,  as  may  reasonably  cause 
apprehension  that  death  or  grievous  hurt  will  be  the  consequence  if  such  right  of  private 
defence is not exercised. 

• Example:  C  Attempts  to  stab  D  maliciously  while  committing  burglary  in  D’s  house.  There  is  a 
reasonable apprehension in the mind of D that C will hurt him grievously, so in order to save 
himself and property, C throttled D with a knife in his chest, causing Death. C will not be liable. 

Case law for Section 103 
In Mohinder Pal Jolly v. State, the deceased worker and some of his colleagues were shouting slogans for 
demands outside the factory. Some brickbats were also thrown by them which damaged the property of 
the owner who fired two shots from outside his office room, one of which killed the deceased worker. 
The court held that it was a case of mischief and the accused will not get the defence of this section. 
Section 104: When such right extends to causing harm other than death. 

Page 73 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

If the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise of the 
right  of  private  defence,  be  theft,  mischief,  or  criminal  trespass,  not  of  any  of  the  descriptions 
enumerated in the last preceding section, that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, 
but  does  extend,  subject  to  the  restrictions  mentioned  in  section  99,  to  the  voluntary  causing  to  the 
wrong-doer of any harm other than death. 

• Example: If A has committed criminal trespass in order to annoy B or hurt him, then B will have 

the right to harm A in proportional manner, not causing death of the person. 

Case law for Section 104 
In V.C Cheriyan v. State, the  three  deceased  along  with  other  persons  had  illegally  laid  a  road  through 
private property of the church. A criminal case was pending against them. The three accused belonging 
to church put up barricades across this road. The deceased was stabbed by accused and Kerela HC held 
that private defence does not extend to causing the death of a person in this case. 

Section 105: Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property. 
The right of private defence of the property commences when: 

• A reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences. The right of private defence of 
property against theft continues until the offender has effected his retreat with the property 

• Or, either the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, 
• Or, the property has been recovered. 
• The right of private defence of property against robbery continues as long as the, 
• Offender causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt 
• Or, wrongful restraint 
• As long as the fear of instant death or 
• Instant hurt or 
• Instant personal restraint continues. 
• The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long 

as the offender continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief. 

The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night continues as long as the house-
trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues. 

• Example: Suppose a thief into the house of an individual, and attempts to hurt him instantly with 
a knife, then that individual has the right to act in private defence and harm that thief to save 
life and property. 

Case law for Section 105 
In  Nga  Pu  Ke  v.  Emp,  paddy  sheaves  belonging  to  the  accused  were  removed  illegally  by  a  person. 
Accused attacked the cartmen and that cartmen jumped off the carts and ran away leaving sheaves. The 
accused still chased him and attacked him leading to death. The court held him as guilty of offence. 
Section  106:  Right  of  private  defence  against  deadly  assault  when  there  is  a  risk  of  harm  to  innocent 
person. 
If in the exercise of private defence against an assault, a person causes apprehension of death, in which 
defender has no choice but harming an innocent person, his right will extend to that running of risk. 4 

• Example:  C  is  attacked  by  a  mob  who  attempts  to  murder  him.  He  cannot  exercise  his  right  to 
private  defence  without  firing  on  the  mob.  In  order  to  save  himself,  he  is  compelled  to  hurt 
innocent children while firing so C committed no offence as he exercised his right. 

2.4 Abetment(उकसाना
उकसाना) 
उकसाना
उकसाना
IPC Chapter V: Sections 107 120 

Provoking, encouraging and aiding anyone for doing any criminal act which is punishable by law 
is  known  as  abetment.  This  article  talks  about  chapter  V  of  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  i.e  Abetment. 
Criminal Law in itself is very clear while imparting any kind of punishment and holding anyone liable 
under any kind of offences. 

Page 74 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Chapter V of Indian Penal Code, 1860 is the first offence which starts in Indian Penal Code, 1860 stating 
that the mastermind behind the commission of offence should not be set free on the mere ground that 
the actusrea has not been done by the person behind the offence committed or yet to be committed. The 
concept of abetment has widens the scope of criminal law to incorporate these criminal intension and 
penalize  them  according  to  the  provision  laid  down  under  chapter  V  of  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860. 

There are four stages of crime which is read as below: 

1.  For  any  offence  being  committed  or  instigates  other  for  there  commission  there  should  be  a 
human  being,  Human  being  plays  an  important  role  in  any  kind  of  criminal  act  being  done  by 
himself or either made other to do so and be liable for the same. 

2.  Intension  and  knowledge  plays  and  important  role  in  any  criminal  act  being  done  by  human 
being. However a non- criminal behavior as simple as buying a knife for household use becomes 
criminal when there is any kind of criminal intension behind getting the knife.Non of the act can 
be considered itself a crime if done with guilty mind. 

3.  After the formation of an intension mere execution is necessary which is followed by actusreai.e 

the act done in return of the intension formed causing injury to others. 

4.  Last stage is the offense itself which is the result of any kind of criminal intention and criminal 

act punishable under law. Eg: Murder, Rape, Robbery, etc. 

So , in middle of the above four stages abetment may take placei.e at the very initial stage of planning 
where the intension is develop by one person but the act is done by other as a result of instigation for 
the commission of an offence. Abetment is a substantive offence where the commission of offence is not 
considered, one is held liable for mere instigating, conspiring and aiding other for the commission of the 
offence. 

Meaning of Abetment: (Section-107) 
Section  107-120  of  Indian  Penal  Code  1860,  talks  about  abetment.  According  to  section  107  which 
explains the meaning of abetment, in general to abets means to instigate, to help, to encourage to put in 
execution his criminal intension. Abetment consist of three act which is laid down in section 107: 
Abetment by instigation: In common it is said that one can motivate other in two possible ways which is 
motivating one for good cause and motivating other for bad cause which is abetment by instigation and 
hence,  held  liable  for  such  instigation  irrespective  of  the  act  abetted  be  committed  or  not.  A  person 
instigate  the  doing  of  a  thing  who  by  willful  misrepresent,  or  willful  concealment  of  a  material  fact 
which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procure , or attempt to cause or procure a thing to 
be 
instigation. 
Illustration: A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant by court of justice to apprehend Z. B, knowing 
that  fact  that  C  is  not  Z,  willful  represent  to  A  that  C  is  Z  ,and  thereby  intentionally  causes  A  to 
apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C. 

abetment 

known 

done. 

This 

by 

as 

is 

Abetment by conspiracy: Abetment by conspiracy involves engaging with one or more person in 
any  conspiracy  for  the  doing  of  that  thing,  if  an  act  or  illegal  omission  takes  in  pursuance  of  that 
conspiracy. Abetment by conspiracy is only said to be done when there is conspiracy done between two 
or  more  person  for  commission  of  an  criminal  act,  if  act  committed  will  amount  to  abetment  by 
conspiracy,  if  the  same  is  not  committed  will  amount  to  conspiracy  and  will  be  punishable  under 
section 120A and not for abetment by conspiracy. 
Abetment  by  aid: The  third  kind  of  abetment  is  abetment  by  intentionally  aiding  (by  an  act  or  illegal 
omission) the doing of any criminal offence. Explanation 2 to section 107 clarifies that a person is said 
to aid the doing of an act, who either prior to or at the time of commission of an offence, does anything 
in order to facilitate the commission of that act. 

Page 75 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Illustration: Aa priest performed the wedding ceremony of a marriage man with an unmarried women. 
Here priest is liable for intentionally aiding and is liable for abetment by aid. 

Who Is Abettor? 
Section 108 of  Indian Penal Code,1860 talks about abettor, a person who abets an offence, who abets 
either the commission of an offence, or either the commission of an act which would be an  offence, if 
committed  by  a  person  capable  by  law  with  the  same  intension  or  knowledge  as  that  of  the  abettor. 

Five proposition as to Abetment , contained in section 108 of IPC, which are as follows: 
The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an offence although the abettor may not 
himself be bound to  do that act. Thus if a public servant is  guilty on  an illegal omission of  duty made 
punishable by the code, and a private person instigates him he abets the offence of which public servant 
is guilty, although the abettor, being a private person, could not himself have been guilty of the offence. 

To constitute the offence of abetment, it is not necessary that the act abetted is committed or not. The 
offence of abetment depends upon the intention of the person who abets, and not upon the actual act 
done by the person abetted. 

Illustration: A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder. 

To constitute the offence of abetment, it is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by 
law  of  committing  an  offence,  or  have  the  same  guilty  intention  or  knowledge  as  that  of  the  abettor. 
Abetment is a substantive offence irrespective of the criminal intention or knowledge to be the same as 
that  of  abettor,  mere  instigation  to  commit  a  criminal  offence  is  necessary  and  does  not  consider  the 
law  or  not. 
abettee 

to  whom  abettor  abets 

to  do  an  act,  either 

capable  by 

Illustration: A with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic person to commit an act which would be 
an  offence,  if  committed  by  a  person  capable  by  law  of  committing  an  offence,  and  having  the  same 
intention  as  A.  Here  A  weather  the  act  be  committed  or  not,  is  guilty  of  abetting  an  offence. 

When  the  abetment  of  an  offence  is  an  offence  the  abetment  of  such  an  abetment  is  also  an  offence. 

Illustration: A  instigates  B  to  instigate  C  to  murder  Z.  B  accordingly  instigates  C  to  murder  Z  and 
commits that offence in consequence of B instigation. B is liable to be punished for the offence with the 
punishment  for  murder  and  as  a  instigates  B  to  commit  the  offence,  A  is  also  liable  for  the  same 
punishment. 

To constitute the offence of abetment by conspiracy, it is not necessary that the abettor should concert 
the offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in pursuance 
of which the offence is committed will be liable. 

Section 108A talks about when a person abets an offence within the meaning of this code who in India, 
abets  the  commission  of  any  act  beyond  India  which  would  be  liable  for  an  offence  if  committed  in 
India. 

Punishment For Abetment Under Indian Penal Code,1860: 
From section 109 to section 120 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 deals with punishment for abetment which 
are as follows: 
Section  109: Punishment  of  abetment  if  the  act  abetted  is  committed  in  consequences,  and  where  no 
express provision is made for its punishment: 

Page 76 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

If a person abets an offence, and the act abetted is committed in consequences of the abetment where 
no expressed provision is made under this code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with 
the punishment provided for the offence with is abetted and committed. 

Whereas in some case of abetment the express provision is made for the punishment. It is to be made 
clear  that  an  act  or  offence  is  said  to  be  committed  in  the  consequences  of  abetment,  when  it  is 
committed  in  consequences  of  instigation,  or  in  pursuance  of  conspiracy,  or  with  aiding,  which 
constitute the abetment. According as offence abetted is cognizable or non- cognizable, bailable or non- 
bailable, triable by court and non -compoundable. 

Illustration: 
A instigates B to give false evidence B under the instigation of A commits an offence. Here A is guilty of 
abetting the offence, and is liable for same offence as of B. 
A offers a bribe to B , a public servant, as a reward of showing some official favour to A. B accepts the 
bribe A has abetted the offence and is liable for the offence defined in section 161 of IPC. 

Section  110:  Punishment  of  abetment  if  person  abetted  does  act  with  different  intension  from 
that of the abettor: 
This  section  laid  down  the  provision  for  punishment  of  abetteei.e  the  person  abetted,  if  does  the  act 
with  different  knowledge  or  intension  from  that  of  the  abettor,  be  punished  with  the  punishment 
provided  for  the  offence  which  would  have  been  committed  if  the  act  has  been  done  with  the  same 
intension  and  knowledge  of  the  abettor.  The  person  abetted  for  the  commission  of  an  offence  and 
commit and act cannot take a defense mere on the ground that the act done in the consequences of the 
abetment is done with different intension and knowledge from that of abettor, he will be equally liable 
for  the  punishment.  According  as  offence  abetted  is  cognizable  or  non-  cognizable,  bailable  or  non- 
bailable, triable by court and non- compoundable. 

Section 111: Liability of the abettor when one act abetted and different act done: 
When an act abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done in the same manner 
as if abetted directly, provided that the act done was likely to be caused as a course of offence abetted, 
and  was  committed  under  the  influence  of  instigation,  or  with  aid,  or  with  pursuance  of  conspiracy 
which  constitute  the  abetment.  And  if  any  act  done  which  is  not  the  probable  consequences  of 
abetment,  the  abettor  is  hereby  not  liable  for  any  different  kind  of  offence  committed.  According  as 
offence  abetted  is  cognizable  or  non-  cognizable,  bailable  or  non-  bailable,  triable  by  court  and  non 
compoundable. 

Illustration: A instigatea child to put poison into the food of Z, and give him the poison for that purpose. 
The child in consequence of the instigation, by mistake put the poison into Y food which was kept just 
next to that of Z which result in death of Y. Here A is liable in the same manner and the same extent as if 
he  has  abetted  the  child  to  poison  Y,  because  child  is  acting  under  the  influence  of  abetment. 

Section 112: Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done: 
Section 112 is an extension of section 111 of Indian Penal Code. According to section 111 if the offence 
committed is different from that of act abetted but it is in probable consequences of the abetment, done 
under the influence of instigation or aiding for the commission of an act. The abettor is held liable of the 
act in the same manner as if abetted directly. 

Further it is said that the word cumulative used here in this section states that the act abetted 
and act done in pursuance of abetment exceeds in nature and thereby causing additional act resulting in 
additional offence of that abetted. Abettor is liable for the additional offence, if that offence is result of 
the probable consequence of abetment. 

Page 77 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section  113:  liability  of  abettor  for  an  effect  caused  by  the  act  abetted  different  from  that 
intended by the abettor: 

Intension and knowledge plays an important role in any criminal act done or abetted. If an act 
abetted  with  different  intension  causing  different  effect  as  a  result,  abettor  will  be  liable  of  the  effect 
cause,  on  the  ground  that  he  knew  that  the  act  abetted  was  likely  to  cause  such  effect.  Although 
intension  is  different  from  the  act  caused  but  one  will  be  liable  for  the  effect  mere  on  the  ground  of 
knowledge. 
                The major difference between section 111 and section 113 is that section 111, says that when 
one  act  abetted  and  difference  act  is  committed  and  in  section  113,  the  act  abetted  and  committed  is 
same  but  the  effect  cause  is  different.  According  as  offence  abetted  is  cognizable  or  non-  cognizable, 
bailable or non- bailable, triable by court and non- compoundable. 

Section 114: Abettor present when offence is committed: 
This section states that whenever any person who is absent would liable to be punished as an abettor, is 
present  when  the  act  or  offence  is  being  committed  in  consequences  of  the  abetment  for  which  he 
would be punishable, the law will resume that the abettor himself has committed such offence and act. 
And  the  abettor  will  be  liable  to  be  punished  for  the  offence  committed  and  not  for  the  abetment  of 
offence. According as offence abetted is cognizable or non- cognizable, bailable or non- bailable, triable 
by court and non- compoundable. 

Terms  Of  Punishment  Provided  In  Section  115,  116,  117,  118,  119,  120  Of  Indian  Penal  Code, 
1860: 
Section  115:  abetment  of  offence  punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for  life-  if  offence  not 
committed: 
If  offence  not  committed  in  consequences  of 
abetment. 
If act causing harm be done in consequences 

14 years of imprisonment +Fine 

7 years of imprisonment +Fine 

Section 116: abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment- if offence be not committed: 
Offence  not  committed 
abetment 
If  abettor  be  a  public  servant  whose  duty  id  to 
prevent offence. 

 of the longest term of punishment provided for the 
offence / fine /both. 
of the longest term of punishment provided for the 
offence / fine /both. 

in  consequences  of 

Section 117: Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons: 
Any person who abets the commission of offence by the public generally or by any number or class of 
person  exceeding  ten,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  the  term  which  may  extent  to  three 
years,  or  fine  or  both.  According  as  offence  abetted  is  cognizable  or  non-  cognizable,  bailable  or  non- 
bailable, triable by court and non- compoundable. 

Punishment for Concealing Designs Or Plans To Commit Offence: 
Section  118,119  and  120  of  Indian  Penal  Code,1860  laid  down  the  provision  for  punishment  of 
concealing  the  design  voluntarily  by  any  act  or  illegal  omission  which  lead  to  the  commission  of  an 
offence be punishable under these sections. 

Section  118:  concealing  design  to  commit  offence  punishable  with  death  or  imprisonment  for 
life: 
If offence committed in consequences of abetment  7 years of imprisonment/ fine 
in  consequence  of 3 years of imprisonment/Fine 
If  offence  not  committed 

Page 78 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

abetment 

Section 119: Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to present: 

If offence committed in consequences of abetment 

If  offence  not  committed 
abetment 
If  offence  committed  whichis  punishable  with 
death or imprisonment for life 

in  consequence  of 

of the longest term of punishment provided for the 
offence / fine /both. 
of the longest term of punishment provided for the 
offence / fine /both. 

10 years of imprisonment. 

Section 120: concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment: 

If offence committed in consequences of abetment 

If  offence  not  committed 
abetment 

in  consequence  of 

of the longest term of punishment provided for the 
offence / fine /both. 
1/8 of the longest term of punishment provided for 
the offence / fine /both. 

Case Laws: 
SheoDail Mal, 1894: 
This case held that instigation may be direct or it may be through letter. Where A writes a letter to B 
instigating  thereby  to  murder  C,  the  offence  of  abetment  by  instigation  is  complete  as  soon  as  the 
contents of letter becomes now to B. 

Queen vs Mohit: 
A  women  prepared  herself  to  become  sutti  in  the  presence  of  the  accused  persons.  They  followed 
herupto the pyre and stood by her step sons crying Ram Ram. One of the accused also admitted that he 
told the women to say Ram Ram. It was held that all those that followed her to the pyre and stood by 
the  actively  abetted  her. 
her 

crying  Ram  Ram  would  be  guilty  of  abetment  as 

Pandala Venkatasami 1881: 
It was held that if a person prepares, in conjunction with others a copy of an indented false document 
and buys a stamp paper for the purpose of writing such a false document and also ask for information 
as  to  fact  to  be  inserted  in  such  false  document,  he  would  be  guilty  for  abetment  of  forgery  because 
these are the acts done to facilitate the commission of the offence. 

2.5 Criminal Conspiracy 
IPC Chapter V-A: Sections 120 A & B 

Conspiracy  means  a  combination  of  two  or  more  persons  for  unlawful  purposes.  It  is  an 
agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act. Criminal conspiracy is a substantive 
offence under the Indian Penal Code, 1860(I.P.C.). Generally, the accused is charged with the offence of 
criminal  conspiracy  along  with  the  charge  of  some  other  substantive  offence  under  the  I.P.C.  or  any 
other law. Chapter V-A of the I.P.C. as inserted in 1913 deals with the offence of criminal conspiracy. In 
this article, an attempt is made to analyze the substantive offence of criminal conspiracy with the help 
of relevant case laws. 

Section 120A of the I.P.C. defines criminal conspiracy as an agreement of two or more persons to 
do or cause to be done: 

I.  An illegal act, or; 
II.  An act that is not illegal by illegal means. 

Page 79 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 43 of the I.P.C. defines the term illegal' as everything that is an offence or is prohibited by law or 
furnishes ground for a civil action. 

The Proviso attached to Section 120A provides that a mere agreement to commit an offence shall 
amount to criminal conspiracy and no overt act or illegal omission is required to be proved. Such overt 
act is necessary only when the object of the conspiracy is the commission of an illegal act not amounting 
to  an  offence.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  illegal  act  is  the  ultimate  object  of  such  agreement  or  is 
merely incidental to that object. 

Essentials of Criminal Conspiracy 
The essentials of this section can be outlined as: 

1.  There 

be 

should 

persons. 
There must be an agreement between two or more persons. If the conspirators commit several 
offences in accordance with the criminal conspiracy, all of them shall be liable for the offences, 
even if some of them did not actively participate in the commission of the crimes. 

agreement 

between 

more 

two 

an 

or 

2.  Such an agreement should be done:  

•  To do an illegal act 
•  To make a person liable for the criminal conspiracy, the agreement must be to do any act 

which is either forbidden by law or is opposed to the law. 

•  Or  to  do  a  legal  act  by  illegal  means  When  any  act  is  done  even  though  it  is  lawful  but 

done by illegal means, it constitutes criminal conspiracy. 

3.  The agreement may be expressed or implied or partly expressed and partly implied. 
4.  As soon as the agreement is made, the conspiracy arises, and the offence is committed. 
5.  And, the same offence is continued to be committed so long as the combination persists. 

The Supreme Court has outlined the above mentioned essential ingredients of criminal conspiracy in R 
Venkatkrishnan vs CBI. 

Critical Analysis 

The main object behind the introduction of Section 120A and 120B to the Code, appears to be an 
attempt to curb criminal thoughts before they take the form of a concrete criminal act, detrimental to 
the  society  at  large.  According  to  Section  43  of  the  Code,  an  illegal'  act  under  the  Indian  Penal  Code 
would imply the commission of an offence, or of an act forbidden by law, or of an act which lays ground 
for a civil liability to arise. For the establishment of the offence of criminal conspiracy, the existence of 
an  agreement  between  the  parties  is  a  sine  qua  non.  This  agreement  may  be  express  or  implied,  the 
important factor is consensus ad idem, i.e., meeting of minds. 

The agreement must be read as a whole and the object ascertained. It is not necessary that more 
than one person must always be convicted for the offence of  criminal conspiracy, it is sufficient if the 
court  is  convinced  that  more  two  or  persons  were  actually  involved  in  the  conspiracy.  The  offender 
might join the conspiracy from the start itself or at any time before the completion of the objective of 
the  agreement,  irrespective  of  the  time  of  joining,  each  party  to  the  offence  would  be  held  equally 
responsible. A criminal conspiracy is said to persist as long as the parties to the agreement continue to 
act in furtherance of the objects of the agreement. 

Proof Of Conspiracy 
The  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy  can  be  proved  by  either  direct  or  circumstantial  evidence.  A 
conspiracy  is  usually  hatched  in  a  secret  and  private  setting  which  is  why  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
produce  any  affirmative  evidence  about  the  date  of  the  formation  of  the  criminal  conspiracy,  the 

Page 80 of 149 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

persons involved in it or the object of such conspiracy or how such object is to be carried out. All of this 
is more or less a matter of inference. 

It was believed that agreement or meeting of minds is the one of the main evidence to prove the 
conspiracy under this section & also it is one of the hardest one to prove because as we all known to the 
fact that offender by himself does not agree to a fact that he is involved with someone It is only matter 
of circumstances that one can prove that there is a meeting of minds or an agreement between those 
two.  Hence,  criminal  conspiracy  is  based  on  circumstantial  evidence  in  most  of  the  cases  there  is  no 
direct evidence to prove the same. 

Also,  point  to  be  noted  that  there  is  no  conspiracy  between  husband  &  wife  because  they  are 

considered as the one person.  

Section 10 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 

Section  10  of  the  Indian  Evidence  Act  contains  the  principle  that  once  a  conspiracy  to  commit  an 
illegal  act  is  proved,  an  act  of  one  conspirator  becomes  the  act  of  another.  Section  10  deals  with  the 
admissibility of evidence in a conspiracy case. It provides that anything said, done or written by any one 
of the conspirators in respect of their common intention is admissible against all the conspirators for 
proving the existence of the conspiracy or that any such person was a party to the conspiracy. However, 
the following conditions are to be satisfied before such fact can be admitted: 

1.  There  should  be  reasonable  ground  to  believe  that  two  or  more  persons  have  conspired  to 

commit an offence or an actionable wrong. 

2.  Anything  said,  done  or  written  by  any  one  of  them  about  their  common  intention  will  be 
evidence  against  the  others  provided  it  is  said,  done  or  written  after  the  time  when  such 
intention was first formed by any one of them. 

Punishment of Criminal Conspiracy 

Punishment  for  criminal  conspiracy  is  contained  under  section  120B  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code. 
The punishment for Section 120A (criminal conspiracy) depends upon the nature of the offence. If the 
agreement is to commit a serious offence, the punishment is more severe. 

Where  a  person  conspires  to  commit  an  offence  that  is  punishable  either  by  death  or  by 
imprisonment  of  life  or  by  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  term  of  two  years  or  above,  and  no  express 
provision  is  made  in  the  Code  for  its  punishment,  then  he  will  be  liable  for  punishment  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  he  had  abetted  such  an  offence.  Abet  means  to  encourage  or  assist  someone  in  doing  a 
crime. 
               If  the  conspiracy  exists  between  two  or  more  persons  to  commit  an  offence  which  is  not 
mentioned  above,  that  is,  offences  which  are  not  punishable  with  death,  imprisonment  for  life  or 
rigorous imprisonment for a term of two or more than two years, such a person will be punished with 
the imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine, or with both. 

Case Laws 

Parveen Vs State Of Haryana (2021) Sc 

The brief facts of the case are: Four accused were being escorted by the police from the Central 
Jail, Jaipur by train to be produced in the Court of CJM, Bhiwani. On reaching the Railway Station Nangal 
Pathani, four young boys entered their compartment, attacked the police party and tried to rescue the 
accused. 
               The accused, who were in custody also tried to escape and an attempt was also made to snatch 
the  official  carbine.  It  was  alleged  that  one  of  the  accused  fired  upon  the  Head  Constable,  who  got 
injured and later succumbed to his injuries. One accused was apprehended and the other three fled. The 
accused were charged under offences Sections 224, 225, 332, 353, 392, 307, 302, 120-B of the IPC and 
for certain offences under the Arms Act. 

Page 81 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The  accused  were  held  guilty  by  the  Sessions  Court  and  on  appeal,  the  High  Court  of  Punjab  and 
Haryana  confirmed  their  conviction.  The  appellant  Parveen  @  Sonu  filed  an  appeal  in  the  Supreme 
Court. 
                The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  held  that  it  is  not  safe  to  hold  a  person  guilty  for  offences  under 
Section 120B I.P.C. in absence of any evidence to show a meeting of minds between the conspirators for 
the  intended  object  of  committing  an  illegal  act.  The  Court  ordered  the  acquittal  of  the  appellant  and 
held that it is not safe to maintain the conviction of the accused on the alleged confessional statements 
of the co-accused in absence of any other corroborative evidence. 

Kehar Singh And Others Vs State (Delhi Administration) (1988) Sc 

The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court,  in  this  case,  has  held  that  the  most  important  ingredient  of  the 
offence of conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to do an illegal act. Such an illegal 
act may or may not be done in pursuance of the agreement, but the very agreement is an offence and is 
punishable. 

Major E.G. Barsay Vs The State Of Bombay (1962) Sc 

In this case, it was held that an agreement to break the law constitutes the gist of the offence of 
criminal  conspiracy  under  Section  120A  IPC.  The  parties  to  such  an  agreement  are  guilty  of  criminal 
conspiracy even if the illegal act agreed to be done by them has not been done. The Court also held that 
it  is  not  an  ingredient  of  the  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy  that  all  the  parties  should  agree  to  do  a 
single illegal act and a conspiracy may comprise the commission of several acts. 

Param Hans Yadav Vs State Of Bihar, 1987 

In this case, it was observed that it is difficult to support the charges of conspiracy with direct 
evidence  the  only  way  by  which  the  one  can  prove  is  criminal  conspiracy  the  prosecution  has  to 
establish the link between the different chain events. 

State Of Tamil Nadu Vs Nalini 

This  is  commonly  known  as  the  Rajiv  Gandhi  assassination  case.  In  this  case,  it  was  held  that 
knowledge about conspiracy would not make an accused a conspirator. It was held that also to provide 
the harbour to the main accused didn't show the sufficient evidence that person is in the conspiracy you 
have to prove that there is a meeting of minds between the parties. 

Hiralal Harilal Bhagwati Vs Cbi 
It  was  believed  that  to  set  up  the  charges  of  conspiracy  first  you  have  to  establish  that  there  is  an 
agreement between the parties. 

Ram Narain Popli Vs C.B.I. (2003) Sc 
In this case, the Supreme Court held that mere proof of the agreement between two or more persons to 
do an unlawful act or an act by unlawful means is enough to convict the parties for criminal conspiracy 
under Section 120B. 

Poulterer's Case (1611) 
In this case, the criminal aspect of conspiracy was developed for the first time by the Star Chamber and 
conspiracy was recognized as a substantive offence. 

Brief facts of the case are: One Walters along with other defendants imputed a false charge of robbery 
on  Stone  and  did  everything  possible  to  ruin  his  family's  reputation.  Rumors  were  spread  that  Stone 
was a gentleman thief and a knave. However, Stone had an alibi and brought some 30 people to attest 
that  he  was  in  London  on  the  day  the  alleged  robbery  took  place.  The  jury  found  an  ignoramus  and 

Page 82 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Stone was discharged. Thereafter, Stone brought an action before the Star Chamber to clear himself of 
the  imputations  leveled  against  him  and  vindicate  his  reputation.  The  defendants  attempted  to  settle 
the matter out of court and also tried to persuade Stone to drop the suit. However, when the process 
started, the defendants accused Stone of barratry and also intimated some of his witnesses. The court 
held  that  the  mere  presence  of  conspiracy  among  the  defendants,  irrespective  of  whether  Stone  was 
is  the  gist  of  the  offence  and  can  be  considered  a  crime. 
falsely 

indicted  or  acquitted 

Bimbdhar Pradhan Vs State Of Orissa, 1956 

In this case, the Supreme Court held that one person could also be convicted for the offence of 
conspiracy.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  court  proves  that  two  or  more  than  two  persons  were  actually 
involved  in  the  criminal  conspiracy.  Where  the  prosecution  proves  that  two  or  more  persons  were 
connected  in  a  conspiracy  and  they  could  not  be  caught,  one  alone  can  still  be  convicted. 

Mulcahy Vs R. (1868) 

The House of Lords, in this case, stated that "A conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of 
two or more but in the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful act by unlawful means. So long as 
such  a  design  rests  in  intention  only  it  is  not  indictable…."  Thus,  two  or  more  persons  must  agree  to 
carry  it  into  effect  and  the  very  plot  is  an  act  in  itself  punishable  for  a  criminal  object  or  the  use  of 
criminal means. 

Tapandas Vs State Of Bombay (1955) Sc 

In  this  case,  the  appellant  along  with  three  others  was  charged  with  the  offence  under  Section 
120B  read  with  Sections  471  and  420  I.P.C.  for  conspiracy  to  use  forged  documents.  The  Trial  Court 
acquitted  all  the  accused,  but  the  High  Court,  in  appeal  reversed  the  acquittal  of  the  appellant  and 
convicted  him  for  the  substantive  offence  as  well  as  for  criminal  conspiracy.  In  appeal,  the  Supreme 
Court  held  that  it  is  a  matter  of  common  sense  that  one  person  alone  can  never  be  held  guilty  of 
criminal conspiracy for the simple reason that he cannot conspire. It was held that the appellant could 
not be convicted under Section 120B when his alleged co-conspirators were acquitted of that offence. 
When all the alleged co-conspirators have been acquitted, the accused alone cannot be held guilty for 
conspiracy unless it can be proved that he conspired to commit an offence not only with the co-accused 
but  with  some  third  person(s)  who  has  not  been  tried,  because  he  is  minor  or  is  absconding. 

Leo Roy Frey Vs Suppdt. Distt. Jail (1958) Sc 

The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in this case, held that the conspiracy to commit a crime is a different 
offence from the crime that is the object of the conspiracy. A conspiracy precedes the commission of the 
crime and is complete before the crime is attempted or completed. 

B.Narsimha Rao Vs Govt. of A.P 

In  this  case, the  appellant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  criminal  conspiracy  along  with  seven 
others. However, he alone was charged with offences under Ss. 120-B, 409 and 471, IPC under section 
5(1)(c) and 5(l)(d) read with section 5(2) of the prevention of corruption Act, 1947. Simultaneously, all 
the other co-conspirators were acquitted by the Trial Court and the High Court. In the end, the Supreme 
Court acquitted the accused on the facts that there had to be another person to communicate with and 
carry  out  the  agreement  and  that  a  single  person  can  never  be  accounted  for  conspiracy. 

The State Of Andhra Pradesh Vs Subbaiah, 1961 

The  Supreme  Court  in  the  above  case  contended  that  "where  the  matter  has  gone  beyond  the 
stage  of  mere  conspiracy  and  offences  are  alleged  to  have  been  committed  in  pursuance  thereof  the 
accused can be charged with the specific offences alleged to have flown out of the conspiracy along with 
the charge of conspiracy. The court observed, "Conspiracy to commit an offence is itself an offence and a 
person can be separately charged with respect to such a conspiracy". 

Page 83 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

State (Delhi Admn) Vs V.C. Shukla 
In the above case the court observed that: 

To prove a criminal conspiracy which is punishable under S. 120-B of IPC, there must be direct 
or  circumstantial  evidence  to  show  that  there  was  an  agreement  between  two  or  more  persons  to 
commit  an  offence.  This  envisages  that  there  must  be  a  meeting  of  minds  resulting  in  an  ultimate 
decision taken by the conspirators regarding the commission of an offence. It is true that in most cases 
it will be difficult to  get direct evidence of an  agreement to conspire but a conspiracy can be inferred 
even from circumstances giving rise to a conclusive or irresistible inference of an agreement between 
two or more persons to commit an offence. 

2.6 Attempts 
IPC Chapter XXIII: Section 511 
Whoever  attempts  to  commit  an  offence  punishable  by  this  Code  with  [imprisonment  for  life]  or 
imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards 
the  commission  of  the  offence,  shall,  where  no  express  provision  is  made  by  this  Code  for  the 
punishment  of  such  attempt,  be  punished  with  [imprisonment  of  any  description  provided  for  the 
offence,  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  one-half  of  the  imprisonment  for  life  or,  as  the  case  may  be, 
one-  half  of  the  longest  term  of  imprisonment  provided  for  that  offence],  or  with  such  fine  as  is 
provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds after so opening the box, 
that there is no jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and therefore is guilty 
under this section. 
(b)  A  makes  an  attempt  to  pick  the  pocket  of  Z  by  thrusting  his  hand  into  Z’s  pocket.  A  fails  in  the 
attempt in consequence of Z’s having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section. 

1. Unlawful Assembly 
Right to Assemble 
Article  19  (1)(B)  of  the  Constitution  of  India  1949, lay  down  that ‘All  citizens  shall  have  right to 
assemble peaceably and without arms. That means citizens of India has been given freedom to assemble 
and  organize  a public  gathering  or  even  processions  on  their  own  will.  But  this  right  to  assemble  is 
subject  to reasonable  restriction by  the  state  in  the  interest  of  sovereignty  and  integrity  of  India  or 
public order under clause 3 of Article 19 of the Constitution of India 1949. Thus, an appropriate authority 
can  prohibit  holding  up  of  a  public  meeting,  in  a case  where  they  are  of  the  opinion  that  doing  so  is 
necessary for maintaining public peace and tranquility(शांित). 

Dispersal of Unlawful Assembly 

In Babulal Parate v. State of Maharashtra[1], the Hon’ble Supreme Court while observing that 
right ‘to hold public meeting’ and to ‘take out public processions’ vests under Article 19 (1) (b) of the 
Constitution of India, stated that: 
“Public order has to be maintained in advance in order to ensure it and, therefore, it is competent 
to  a  legislature  to pass  a  law permitting  an  appropriate  authority  to  take  anticipatory  action  or 
place  anticipatory  restrictions  upon  particular  kinds  of  acts  in  an  emergency  for  the  purpose  of 
maintaining public order.” 

Hence,  to  put  reasonable  restriction  over  the freedom  to  assemble granted  under  article  19 
(1)(B),  sections  129  and  130  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1860  talks  about the  dispersal  of 
assemblies. 

According to Section 129 of Cr.P.C any unlawful assembly or any assembly of five or more persons 
likely to cause a breach of public peace may be dispersed by command of any Executive Magistrate or 

Page 84 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

an officer incharge of a police station or a police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, by use 
of civil force. 

According to Section 130 (1) of Cr.P.C, If any such assembly cannot be otherwise dispersed, and if 
it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the Executive Magistrate of the highest 
rank who is present may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces.  
After going through above two sections i.e. 129 and 130 of Cr.P.C one obvious question which arises to 
the mind of the reader that: 

What is an Unlawful Assembly? 

An  assembly  may  turn  unruly  and  which  may  cause injury to  person, property  or  public  order. 
Such an unruly assembly is termed as ‘Unlawful Assembly.’ In Moti Das v. State of Bihar,[2]it was held 
that  ‘an  assembly,  which  was  lawful  to  start  with,  became  unlawful  the  moment  one  of  the  members 
called  on  the  others  to  assault  the  victim  and  his  associates,  and  in  response  to  his  invitation  all  the 
members of the assembly started to chase the victim while he was running.’ 

The term ‘Unlawful Assembly’ has been defined under section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 

as an assembly of five or more persons having a common object to perform an omission or offence. 
Essentials to constitute an Unlawful Assembly[3] 
To constitute an unlawful assembly the following 3 conditions must co-exist:- 

• There must be an assembly of five persons. 
• The assembly must have a common object and 
• The common object must be to commit one of the five illegal objects specified in the section. 

1) There must be an assembly of five persons 
The Supreme Court of India has upheld invariably in a number of cases such as Dharam Pal Singh v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh[4] that; 
“WHERE  ONLY  FIVE  NAMED  PERSONS  HAVE  BEEN  CHARGED  FOR  CONSTITUTING  AN  UNLAWFUL 
ASSEMBLY, AND ONE OR MORE OF THEM ARE ACQUITTED, THE REMAINING ACCUSED (WHO ARE LESS 
THAN  FIVE)  CANNOT  BE  CONVICTED  AS  MEMBERS  OF  UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY,  UNLESS  IT  IS  PROVED 
THAT  THE  UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY,  BESIDES  CONVICTED  PERSONS  CONSISTED  OF  SOME  OTHER 
PERSONS AS WELL WHO WERE NOT IDENTIFIED AND SO COULD NOT BE NAMED.” 

2) The assembly must have a common object 
The law does not declare a mere assemblage of men, however large it is, as illegal unless it is inspired 
by  an  illegal  common  object.  In  the  case  of Sheikh Yusuf v. Emperor,[5]the court said that; “the word 
‘object’ means the purpose or design to do a thing aimed at and that the object must be ‘common’ to the 
persons  who  comprise  the  assembly.” A Common  Object is  where  all  or  minimum five member  of  the 
assembly possesses and shares one object.    

3) The common object must be to commit one of the five illegal objects specified in the section 
As  stated  earlier,  an  assembly  of  five  or  more  persons  is  designated  as  an  unlawful  assembly,  if  the 
common object of the persons composing that assembly is any one of the following five objects declared 
illegal under section 141, IPC: 

1.  To overawe Government by criminal force. 
2.  To resist the execution of law or legal process. 
3.  To commit an offence. 
4.  forcible possession or dispossession of any property; or 
5.  To compel any person to do illegal acts. 

i) To overawe government by criminal force: ‘Overawe’  means  to  create  fear  in mind  of  another  person. 
That is when a public procession tends to overawe government by the use of force, like what the Stone 
Pelters  do  at  parts  of  Kashmir  to  protest  against  the  government,  such  an  assembly  is  termed  as  an 
unlawful assembly. 

Page 85 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

ii) To  resist  the  execution  of  law  or  legal  process: Resistance  by  an  assembly  to  a  legal  process  or 
execution  of  law,  for  example,  executing  a  court’s  judgment  or  order  comes  under  execution  of  law, 
Hence,  restraining  the  arrest  in  case  of  Baba  Ram  Rahim  in  Haryana  was  an  illegal  act  by  people  and 
government  decided  for  dispersion  of  unlawful  assembly  under  section  144  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
iii) To  commit  an  offence: Where  an  assembly  of  5  or  more  persons  having  a  common  object  of 
performing  an  act  which  is  prohibited  by  law  or  forms  an  offence  under  Indian  Penal  Code  or  other 
special or Local Laws, such an assembly would be an unlawful assembly. 
iv) Forcible possession or dispossession of any property: Where a criminal force is used by an assembly 
to deprive a person of enjoyment of the right to way or right to use of water or any other incorporeal 
right  that  the  person  is  enjoying  and  in  possession  of.  Or  to  obtain  possession  of  any  property  or  to 
impose such rights, the above acts are prohibited under clause 4 of section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860. 
v) To compel any person to do illegal acts: if assembly by using criminal force on others compel them to 
perform an illegal act than that assembly would be an unlawful assembly. 

What is Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure? 

Section 144 gives the “Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger”. 

This  section  gives  power  to  a  District  Magistrate,  a  Sub-divisional  Magistrate  or  any  other  Executive 
Magistrate  specially  empowered  by  the  state  government  in  this  behalf  to  issue  orders  in  the  case 
where  he  has  sufficient  ground  to  take  action  and  for  immediate  prevention  or  speedy  remedy  is 
desirable against the apprehended danger. 
The object of section 144 is to pass an immediate order in advance to prevent any apprehended danger 
or to immediately give a remedy in case of emergency. Preservation of peace and tranquillity in society 
is  the  prime  purpose  of  the  state  government;  hence,  the  government  specially  empowers  executive 
magistrates  under  144  to  take  immediate  action  in  case  of  emergency  and  to  provide  an  immediate 
remedy in the following three situations mention under clause 1 of section 144 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure: 
To Prevent; 

1.  Obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed. 
2.  A danger to human life, health or safety, or 
• Disturbance of the public tranquillity or a riot or an affray. 

Prohibition of the right to assemble is not absolute 
In the case of Dr. Anindya Gopal Mitra v. State,[6] it was held that the amount of power vested under the 
magistrate under section 144 is to suspend the exercise of the right on particular occasions and not to 
prohibit it absolutely. In this case, police commissioner refused to give permission to a political party 
(BJP),  to  hold  public  meetings  by  prohibiting  it  under  section  144  of  the  Cr.P.C.,  the  Hon’ble  Calcutta 
High Court; quashed the order passed by the police commissioner and said that ‘the holding of meetings 
could  not  be  totally  prohibited,  but  necessary  restrictions  may  be  imposed  and  preventive  measures 
may be taken.’ 

Duration of applicability of section 144 

According  to  clause  4  of  section  144  of  the  Cr.P.C.  ‘No  order  under  this  section  shall  remain in 
force  for  more  than  two  months  from  the  date  of  issuance,  provided  the  state  government,  if  of  the 
opinion that it is necessary to do in case of emergency to prevent danger to human life, health or safety 
or to prevent a riot, than the state government may order the magistrate to make order to extend the 
period of applicability of section 144, not more than the period of six months. 

As  this  section  confers  full  power  to  magistrate  to  take  certain  action  to  apprehend  danger  in 
case  of  emergency,  the  Magistrate  should  apply  his  mind  to  see  whether  the  matter  is  of  such  nature 

Page 86 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

which  requires  an  order  under  this  section,  as  otherwise  a  matter  to  disperse  unlawful  assembly 
creating public nuisance can be dealt with under section 133 of Cr.P.C 

Difference between section 144 and section 133 of the Cr.P.C 

Cases  of  ordinary  public  nuisance  are  covered  under  section  133;  while,  cases  of  urgency  are 
covered by section 144. Further, under the latter, the very urgency of the case demands the laying aside 
of  the  usual  formalities  and  preliminaries  to  the  making  of  an  order.  While,  under  section  133,  the 
Magistrate  acts  on  the  report  of  a  police  officer  or  other  information;  there  is  no  such  requirement 
under section 144.[7] 

Who all are liable to be penalised for being a Part of an unlawful assembly? 
Section 142 of Indian Penal Code 
Whoever, being aware of facts that makes any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that 
assembly or continues in it, is said to be the member of that unlawful assembly. 
In  the  above  section,  to  become  a  member  of  an  unlawful  assembly  there  should  be  a  presence  of 
knowledge and intention on part of the person joining such assembly. 

Punishment for Unlawful Assembly 
i) Under  Section  143  of  I.P.C. whoever  is  a  member  of  an  unlawful  assembly  shall  be  punished  with 
imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  six  months,  or  with  fine,  or  with 
both. 
ii) Under Section 144 of I.P.C. whoever  joins  unlawful  assembly  armed  with  a  deadly  weapon  which  is 
likely to cause death; shall be punished with imprisonment for two years, or fine or both. 
iii) Under Section 145 of I.P.C. whoever joins or continue to be in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been 
commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both. 
iv) Under  Section  149  of  I.P.C. where  an  assembly  commits  an  offence  than  every  member  of  that 
unlawful assembly, who knew such offence is likely to be committed, will be guilty of that offence. And 
be punished for the term same as for the offence. 

*Gang Rape from point of view of Joint criminal Liability 
Is there any difference between laws relating to Rape and Gang Rape? 
The  offence  of  rape  and  gang  rape  are  punishable  under  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  separate 
punishment  has  been  provided  for  them.  A  gang  rape  is  committed  by  more  than  one  person  on  a 
woman while a rape is committed by one man. The punishment provided for the offences are as follows: 
Section  376  of  the  IPC states  that  if  the  rape  is  committed  by  persons  listed  below,  they  shall  be 
punished with rigorous punishment of not less than 10 years, but can extend to imprisonment for life, 
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 

• Police officer within the limits of the police station. 
• A police officer in the premises of any station house. 
• A police officer on a woman in the police officer’s custody. 
• Public servant on a woman’s in his custody. 
• Member of the armed forces. 
• Any person in the management of the jail, remand home etc. on inmate of such place. 
• Staff/management of the of a hospital on a woman in that hospital. 
• By a person who is in a position trust or authority or control or dominance towards a woman on 

such woman. 

• During communal or sectarian violence. 
• On a pregnant woman 
• On a woman less than 16 yrs of age 
• On a woman incapable of giving consent 

Page 87 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• On a mentally or physically disabled woman 
• Who causes grievous bodily harms or endangers the life of a woman. 
• Who commits rape repeatedly on the same woman. 

If any other person commits rape on any woman, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of 
either  description  for  a  term  which  shall  not  be  less  than  seven  years,  but  which  may  extend  to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 

Section 376A says if a person commits an offence which is punishable under section 376 which causes 
the death of the women or causes the women to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished 
with  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a  term  which  shall  not  be  less  than  20  years,  but  may  extend  to 
imprisonment for life or with death. 

Gang Rape 
Section  376D prescribes  punishment  for  gang  rape  and  says  where  a  woman  is  raped  by  a  group  of 
persons,  then  they  shall  be  punishable  with  rigorous  punishment  of  not  less  than  20  years,  but  may 
extend to life imprisonment, and with fine. 

Provided  that  such  fine  shall  be  just  and  reasonable  to  meet  the  medical  expenses  and 
rehabilitation of the victim: Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to 
the victim. 

Let’s have a look at how far the judiciary has gone to interpret the various legislation related to 

rape and laid down landmark judgments where no law was prescribed. 
Judicial stand on rape prior to 2000 

Judiciary has played an important role in protecting the rights of the women and have tried to 

interpret laws in consonance with international treaties and Conventions. 

Till  2002,  the  judiciary  was  not  so  proactive in  convicting  the  rapists  and  the  sexual  history  of 
the  women  was  the  primary  factor  considered  while  the  verdict  was  given.  The  same  was  reflected 
when the Hon’ble Supreme Court acquitted the accused based upon the sexual history of the victim in 
the Mathura Case. The court presumed that the victim gave her consent because she was habitual of the 
sexual intercourse and the vagina of the admit could admit two-fingers very easily. 
But due to widespread  protests and open letter to the Supreme Court by some intellectuals, led to an 
amendment  in  the  Criminal  Act.  This  amendment  said  that  if  a  victim  says  that  she  did  not  give  the 
consent, then the Court shall assume the same. 
How is the quantum of punishment is decided in rape cases? 

• For Rape Cases 
• For Gang Rape Cases 

RAPE CASES 
Capital Punishment in Rape Cases: 
Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod vs State of Gujarat 

In  the  instant  case,  the  victim  who  had  not  seen  even  ten  summers  in  her  life  is  the  victim  of 
sexual assault and animal lust of the accused appellant. She was not only raped but was murdered by 
the accused appellant. 

Imposition of the sentence without considering its effect on the social order in many cases may be in 
reality  a  futile  exercise.  The  social  impact  of  the  crime,  e.g.  where  it  relates  to  offences  against  women, 
dacoity,  kidnapping,  misappropriation  of  public  money,  treason  and  other  offences  involving  moral 
turpitude  or  moral  delinquency  which  have  great  impact  on  social  order,  and  public  interest,  cannot  be 
lost sight of and per se require exemplary treatment. Any liberal attitude by imposing meager sentences or 
taking too sympathetic view merely on account of lapse of time in respect of such offences will be result-
wise  counter  productive  in  the  long  run  and  against  societal  interest  which  needs  to  be  cared  for  and 
strengthened by string of deterrence inbuilt in the sentencing system. 

Page 88 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The plea that in a case  of circumstantial evidence death should not be awarded is  without any 
logic.  If  the  circumstantial  evidence  is  found  to  be  of  an  unimpeachable  character  in  establishing  the 
guilt of the accused, that forms the foundation for conviction. That has nothing to do with the question 
of  sentence  as  has  been  observed  by  this  Court  in  various  cases  while  awarding  death  sentence.  The 
mitigating  circumstances  and  the  aggravating  circumstances  have  to  be  balanced.The  plea  of  learned 
counsel  for  the  appellant  that  the  conviction  is  based  on  circumstantial  evidence  and,  therefore,  the 
death sentence should not be awarded is clearly unsustainable. 

The case at hand falls in the rarest of rare category. The circumstances highlighted establish the 

depraved acts of the accused and they call for only one sentence i.e. death sentence. 

As  dealing  with  sentencing,  courts  have  thus  applied  the  “Crime  Test”,  “Criminal  Test”  and  the 
“Rarest  of  the  Rare  Test”,  the  tests  examine  whether  the  society  abhors  such  crimes  and  whether  such 
crimes shock the conscience of the society and attract intense and extreme indignation of the community. 
Courts  have  further  held  that  where  the  victims  are  helpless  women,  children  or  old  persons  and  the 
accused  displayed  depraved  mentality,  committing  crime  in  a  diabolic  manner,  the  accused  should  be 
shown no remorse and death penalty should be awarded. 

Dhananjay Chatterjee Alias Dhana vs State Of West Bengal 

A  security  guard  raped  and  murdered  a  school  girl  in  Kolkata  in  1990  in  retaliation  for  his 
transfer  on  her  complaint  made  earlier.  The  apex  court  while  awarding  the  death  sentence  to  the 
accused observed that the state in which the body of the deceased was found, it is obvious that a most 
heinous, cold blooded, inhuman type of barbaric rape and murder was committed on a helpless girl. 

In  our  opinion, the measure of punishment in a given case must depend upon the atrocity  of  the 
crime;  the  conduct  of  the  criminal  and  the  defenceless  and  unprotected  state  of  the  victim. 
Imposition  of  appropriate punishment  is  the manner  in  which  the  courts  respond  to the society’s  cry for 
justice against the criminals. 
“Justice  demands  that  courts  should  impose  punishment  fitting  to  the  crime  so  that  the  courts 
reflect  public  abhorrence  of  the  crime.  The  courts  must  not  only  keep  in  view  the  rights  of  the 
criminal  but  also  the  rights  of  the  victim  of  crime  and  the  society  at  large  while  considering  the 
imposition of appropriate punishment.” 

Bantu vs State of Uttar Pradesh 

The victim aged about five years was not only raped but was murdered in a diabolic manner. The 
Court awarded extreme punishment of death, holding that for deciding just and appropriate sentence to 
be awarded for an offence, the aggravating and mitigating factors and circumstances in which a crime 
has been committed must be delicately balanced by the Court in a dispassionate manner. 

Life imprisonment in Rape Cases: 
State vs Deepak Dogra,2013 

The boy established the sexual relations with the victim on the false pretext that he will marry 
her  later.  He  performed  an  invalid  marriage  when  the  girl  complained  of  him  to  the  police  when  he 
refused to marry her and she was pregnant with his child. 

In the present case, the act of the convict is most deplorable, both legally and morally. It is time 
for  the  realization  that  certain  category  of  sexually  depraved  behaviour  is  totally  unacceptable  in  the 
Indian  Socio-  Legal  System  which  seeks  to  protect  the  chastity  the  first  virtue  of  a  woman  and  such 
behaviour can prove to be costly as has happened in the present case. 

Keeping  in  view  the  ghastly  and  inhuman  act  of  the  convict,  a  substantive  and  stern 
sentence  is  required  to  be  imposed  upon  the  convict  so  that  it  is  not  only  in  commensuration 
with the gravity of the crime but also serves as an example for the others who might also venture 
on the same forbidden path. The convict does not deserve any leniency. 

The  Court  cannot  and  should  not  give  such  a  licence  to  those  who  keep  on  looking  for 
opportunities  to  exploit  the  sentiments  and  vulnerability  of  Indian  girls  who  perceive  marriage  as  a 

Page 89 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

pious bonding and not as a union of two bodies. Allowing such persons to go scott free after exploiting 
poor  and  helpless  girls  in  this  manner  could  not  have  been  the  intention  of  the  legislature  which 
life. 
as 
considered 
In view of the above discussion, the conviction imposed on the appellant herein is confirmed. However, 
the  sentence  of  life  imprisonment  is  modified  to  RI  for  10  years  with  a  fine  of  Rs  1000,  in  default,  to 
further undergo RI for one month. 

imprisonment 

heinous 

attract 

such 

rape 

up 

be 

to 

to 

to 

Punishment for more than 10 years but less than life imprisonment in Rape Cases: 
Santosh vs State Of Uttar Pradesh 

The accused committed rape on a girl belonging to scheduled caste. The accused was awarded 
life imprisonment. An appeal was filed for the same in the apex court. The accused was 25 years 
of age at the time of the incident and the only bread earner of the family. It was his first guilt and 
hailed from a very poor family. 

The apex court considered all the above factors and reduced the sentence to 12 years. The 

court said that in such case the appropriate sentence cannot be more than 12 years. 

Punishment for less than 10 years in rape Cases: 
The State Of Punjab vs Gurmit Singh & Ors 

A 10th class student was abducted and raped by four young men aged 21-24 years. The accused 
were acquitted by the trial court and appeal was filed against the same. The apex court while reversing 
the  judgment  said that as far as the sentence is concerned, athe court has to strike a balance. In this case, 
the occurrence took place more than 11 years ago. The respondents were aged between 21-24 years of age 
when the offence was committed. We  are  informed  that  the  respondents  have  not  been  involved  in 
any  other  offence  after  they  were  acquitted  by  the  trial  court,  more  than  a  decade  ago.  All  the 
respondents, as well as the prosecutrix, must have married and settled down in life. These are some 
of  the  factors  which  we  need  to  take  into  consideration  while  imposing  an  appropriate  sentence  on  the 
respondents. 

In  this  case,  we  have,  while  convicting  the  respondents,  imposed,  for  reasons  already  set  out 
above, the sentence of 5 years R.I. with fine of Rs. 5000/- and in default of payment of fine further R.I. 
for one year on each of the respondents for the offence under Section 376 IPC. Therefore, we do not, in 
the instant case, for those very reasons, consider it desirable to award any compensation, in addition to 
the fine already imposed, particularly as no scheme also appears to have been drawn up as yet. 

State of Maharashtra vs Chandraprakash Kewal Chand Jain 

A  girl  who  was  newly  married  was  raped  by  one  policeman  twice  while  his  husband  was  kept 
separate from her. He not only raped her but also threatened her that if she opens her mouth, then he 
will  burn  her  and  her  husband  alive.  Trial  court-sentenced  the  respondent  to  suffer  rigorous 
imprisonment for 5 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000, in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 6 
months. 
On  the  question  of  sentence  we  can  only  say  that  when  a  person  in  uniform  commits  such  a 
serious crime of rape on a young girl in her late teens, there is no room for sympathy or pity. The 
punishment must in such cases be exemplary. We, therefore, do not think we would be justified in 
reducing the sentence awarded by the trial court which is not harsh. 

Om Prakash vs State of Uttar Pradesh 

The victim was in court because her husband was facing challan proceedings. She was 6 months 
pregnant. The accused came to attend the same and tried to rape her when he found her alone in the 
Zila Parishad. Although no evidence of rape was found, the accused was given a seven years sentence 
only on the basis of the statement of the victim and eyewitnesses. 

The trial court had awarded 10 years punishment to the accused considering that there was “full 
possibility” that the accused was aware of her pregnancy. But the apex court reduced the punishment to 

Page 90 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

7  years  because  no  evidence  was  brought  to  the  court  that  the  accused  actually  had  the  knowledge 
about her pregnancy. 

GANG RAPE CASES 
Capital Punishment(मृ(cid:7004)यु दंड 
मृ(cid:7004)यु दंड ) in cases of Gang Rape 
मृ(cid:7004)यु दंड 
मृ(cid:7004)यु दंड 
Shakti Mills Rape Case 

A  22-year  old  photojournalist  was  brutally  raped  by  5  men  including  a  minor  when  she  was 
clicking pictures of a worn out mill called Shakti Mills in Mumbai. Awarding death penalty to the three, 
the court said, 

If  this  is  not  the  case  where  death  sentence  prescribed  by  law  is  not  valid,  which  is?” the  judge 

asked. 

I am constrained to hold that the mitigating circumstances like young age of accused, their 
socio-economic  conditions  and  non-existing  chances  of  their  reformation,  pale 
into 
insignificance in the light of the aggravating circumstances. Hence this case, without any doubts, 
falls into the category of the “rarest of rare.” Therefore, if the object of punishment is to be achieved, 
then  here  in  the  case,  only  maximum  punishment  will  send  the  message  to  the  society  and  also  to 
similar like minded persons. To show leniency or mercy in the case of such heinous crime and on the 
accused who have shown no repentance or remorse after exhibiting extreme depraved mentality would 
be a travesty of justice. This Court cannot do so. 

The Nirbhaya Case (2012) 

This  case  hardly  requires  any  facts  to  be  stated  as  it  is  still  fresh  in  the  consciousness  of  the 
nation. A paramedical student was tortured by six men to such an extent that an iron rod was shoved 
into her vagina and her intestines, abdomen, and genitals were damaged severely. They threw her out 
of the bus in the wintery night. 

One  of  the  accused  was  juvenile  and  was  sent  to  a  reform  facility  for  three  years.  One  of  the 

accused committed suicide in the jail and rest were given the death penalty. 

The court observed that “Question of awarding sentence is a matter of discretion and has to be 
exercised  on  consideration  of  circumstances  aggravating  or  mitigating  in  the  individual  cases… 
protection  of  society  and  deterring  the  criminal  is  the  avowed  object  of  law…while  determining 
sentence  in  heinous  crimes,  Judges  ought  to  weigh  its  impact  on  the  society  and  impose  adequate 
sentence  considering  the  collective  conscience  or  society’s  cry  for  justice.  While  considering  the 
imposition  of  appropriate  punishment,  courts  should  not  only  keep  in  view  the  rights  of  the  criminal 
but also the rights of the victim and the society at large.” 

Life imprisonment in Gang Rape Cases: 
Mohan Lal & Anr vs State Of Punjab 

A student was forcibly raped by her teachers including the Director of Education of Punjab state. 
The trial court imposed 10 years of imprisonment on the accused and fine of Rs.2000/- and Rs. 3,000/- 
respectively, and in default of payment of fine, to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for one year 
and six months respectively. But an appeal was filed by the accused. The Supreme Court while agreeing 
with the trial court stated that so far as the conviction is concerned, as it was a case of gang rape by 
teachers  of  their  student,  the  punishment  of  10  years  rigorous  imprisonment  imposed  by  the 
trial court is shocking, considering the relationship between the parties. It was a fit case where 
life imprisonment could have been awarded to all the accused persons. 

Punishment for less than 20 years in Gang Rape Cases: 
Baldev Singh & Ors vs State Of Punjab 

The  prosecutrix (अिभयो(cid:6989)(cid:7074)ी)  was  gang  raped  and  beaten  by  the  accused  when  she was going to 
her  house. All  the  three  appellants  were  convicted  and  sentenced  to  10  years  rigorous 
Page 91 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

imprisonment. The High Court upheld the sentence. The appellants had already gone for 2 years 
imprisonment. The accused and prosecutrix and the appellant are married (not to each other) 
and  the  prosecutrix  has  two  children  also.  The  incident  is  now  14  years  old  and  it  was  stated 
before the court that both the parties have entered into a compromise. Therefore, the accused 
should  be  acquitted. The  apex  took  all  the  above  listed  factors  into  consideration  and  reduced  the 
sentence of the accused to that much which the accused had already undergone. 
In this case, the sentence awarded by the court was less than the punishment prescribed in the statute.   

Shimbhu & Anr v. State Of Haryana 

The  victim  in  this  present  case  was  gang  raped  by  the  accused.  The  Additional  Sessions  Judge 
convicted  the  accused  and  awarded  them  10  years  rigorous  imprisonment.  The  High  Court  upholded 
the same. The accused filed an appeal and the learned counsel on behalf of the appellant contended that 
the accused should be awarded lesser punishment as there has been a compromise between the parties. 
But the court rejected these contentions and held that rape is a non-compoundable offence and cannot 
be considered a leading factor in reducing the punishment. Because there might be a possibility that the 
victim has been pressurized for the compromise. 

By  the  Criminal  Law  Amendment,  2013,  the  proviso  which  said  that  in  exceptional 
circumstances,  the  punishment  may  be  reduced,  has  been  deleted  in  the  wake  of  the  rising  of 
crimes  against  women.  Though  this  deletion  does  not  affect  the  discretionary  powers  given  to 
the judiciary. 

The court has warned the subordinate courts and the High courts again and again in the words: 

This  is  yet  another  opportunity  to  inform  the  subordinate  Courts  and  the  High  Courts  that  despite 
stringent provisions for rape under Section 376 IPC, many Courts in the past have taken a softer view while 
awarding sentence for such a heinous crime. This Court has in the past noticed that few subordinate and 
High  Courts  have  reduced  the  sentence  of  the  accused  to  the  period  already  undergone  to  suffice  as  the 
punishment, by taking aid of the proviso to Section 376(2) IPC. The above trend exhibits stark insensitivity 
to the need for proportionate punishments to be imposed in such cases. 

Acquittal of the accused due to lack of evidence: 
Mahmood Farooqui vs State (Govt Of NCT Of Delhi) 

The  victim  alleged  that  she  was  forcefully  gang  raped  by  the  accused  in  the  veranda  of  a 
community  hall.  But  no  semen  was  found  on  the  clothes  of  any  of  the  accused.  The  community  hall 
where  the  rape  has  been  alleged  to  be  committed  is  a  crowded  place  and  also  the  time  when  rape  is 
alleged to be committed was during Ganpati festival. 

The court disbelieved the story of the prosecution because in the circumstances as stated by the 
prosecutrix,  it  was  difficult  to  believe  that  the  appellant  accused  could  have  been  successful  in 
committing  upon  the  victim  girl  one  after  the  other.  The  accused  appellant  were  acquitted  under 
section 376 but convicted under section 511 of the IPC. 

Can A Woman Be Charged For Gang Rape? 

The rationale given by the High court in Priya Patel vs State of M.P.[14] was that though a woman 
could not commit rape but if a woman facilitated the act of rape, she could be prosecuted for gang 
rape. The  High  Court  was  of  the  view  that  though  a  woman  may  not  commit  rape,  but  if  a  woman 
facilitates  the  act  of  rape,  Explanation-I  to  Section  376(2)  comes  into  operation  and  she  may  be 
prosecuted for gang rape. The rule is based on the principle of common intention as provided in section 
34 of the IPC. 

The  apex  court  in  the  same  case  in  appeal  held  that,  after  a  reading  of  Section  375  of  the  IPC, 
rape  may  be  committed  only  by  man.  The  explanation  to  Section  376  (2)  merely  indicates  that  when 
one or more persons act in furtherance of their common intention to rape a woman, each person of the 
group must be deemed to have committed gang rape. The person included both men and women. 

Page 92 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

* Dacoity from point of view of Joint criminal Liability 

Aggravated  form  of  robbery  not  only  includes  robbery  but  it  also  includes  theft  and  serious 
injuries to the victim. When five or more than five persons commit or attempt to commit a robbery that 
is known as dacoity. It is more of an aggravated form of robbery and generally, the robber is armed with 
deadly weapons. 

Dacoity  is  defined  under Section  391 of  the  IPC  and  the  punishment  for  it  is  defined 
under Section  395 of  the  IPC.  The  only  difference  between  robbery  and  dacoity  is  a  number  of 
participants. Section 395 punishes every member of the group in dacoity whether that person takes an 
active part or not. The punishment under this section is imprisonment up to 10 years with fine.  

Dacoity 

According  to  the  dictionary  of  oxford,  dacoity  means  an  act  of  violent  robbery  which  is 
committed  by  an  armed  gang.  There  is  only  one  factor  which  differentiates  dacoity  from  robbery  and 
that is the number of offenders. One person can also commit a robbery and more than 1 person can also 
commit robbery. But when 5 or more than 5 commit a robbery it is termed as dacoity. 

Section  391 of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  defines  robbery.  It  says  that  when  5  or  more  than  5 
conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons conjointly 
committing  or  attempting  to  commit  a  robbery,  and  persons  present  and  aiding  such  commission  or 
attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said  to commit 
“dacoity”. 

Essential Ingredients 
In order to commit dacoity, there are 3 essentials which must be there. These essentials are: 

• There should be at least five or more than five persons; 
• They should conjointly commit or attempt to commit dacoity; 
• They should have dishonest intention. 

Sentence for Dacoity 

Punishment for dacoity is defined under Section 395 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. This section 
says that a person who commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous 
imprisonment  for  a  term  which  can  be  extended  to  ten  years,  and  shall  also  be  liable  to  pay  the  fine. 
This offence is cognizable, non-bailable, and non-compoundable in nature. 

The  State  vs  Sadhu  Singh  and  Ors in this  case,  four  and  one  kurda  Singh  was  involved  in 
committing  a  dacoity.  They  all  were  armed  with  deadly  weapons  such  as  rifles  and  pistols.  They 
committed  a  robbery  at  the  house  of  gharsiram.  They  injured  Gharsiram,  jugalkishore,  Sandal  and 
Jugalkisore. The dacoits, in this case, tried to take a wristwatch and a shawl of one person but as they 
were villagers the dacoits were not able to take anything with them. When dacoits started running from 
the villagers they received a hot chase from them and in return dacoits shot a fire. As a result, dharma, 
one  of  the  villagers  died  but  the  villages  captured  one  of  the  dacoits.  In  this  case,  the  dacoits  were 
charged under Section 395 of the Indian Penal Code.  

Aggravated form of Dacoity 

Aggravated  form  of  dacoity  is  defined  under Section  396 of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860. 
Under  Section 396 aggravated form is defined as dacoity with murder. It says that if anyone of five or 
more  than  five  persons,  who  are  conjointly  committing  dacoity,  commits  murder  in  so  committing 
dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death and shall also be liable to fine. 
The ingredients of Section 396 are: 

• The offence of dacoity must be committed with the joint act of the accused persons;  
• Murder must be committed in course of the commission of the dacoity. 

If  anyone  of  the  five  or  more  persons  who  are  committing  robbery  commit  murder  while  committing 
dacoity then, every one of them will held liable for murder even if some of them did not participate in 

Page 93 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

committing the murder. Under Section 396 of the IPC, it is not necessary to prove whether the murder 
was committed by a single person or it was committed by all of them. It is also not necessary to prove 
the common intention. The prosecution is only required to prove that the murder was committed while 
committing  the  dacoity.  If  the  prosecution  successfully  proves  that  the  murder  was  committed  while 
committing dacoity, then all of the members will be punished under Section 396 of the IPC. 

If the offenders are running and while chasing them if one of the dacoits kill someone then the 
other members of the gang can not be held guilty under Section 396 of the IPC. In one of the landmark 
case laws i.e. Laliya v state of Rajasthan it was observed that whether the murder is a part of dacoity or 
not, it totally depends on the circumstances of that time. 
The court decided that the attention has to be paid on these points before coming to a conclusion. These 
points are: 

• Whether the dacoits retreated or not and the murder was committed while retreating or not? 
• What is the time interval between the attempt of murder and dacoity? 
• What is the distance between the places where they attempt to murder and attempt to dacoity 

was committed? 

In one of the cases i.e. in Shyam Behari v. State of Uttar Pradesh, the dacoit killed one of the victims, who 
had  caught  the  robber’s  associate  in  an  attempt  to  commit  dacoit.  The  robber  was  convicted  under 
Section 396 of IPC because any murder committed by the dacoits during their fight would be treated as 
murder.  

Offences Connected with Dacoity 

Before  committing  any  offence  intention  plays  a  very  important  role  in  it.  Under  criminal  law, 
the intention is known by Mens Rea. Mens rea means guilty of Mind. For every criminal offence, there 
should  be  Mens  rea  on  the  part  of  the  offender.  If  put  in  other  words  it  means  that  there  has  to  be 
intention  to  commit  a  crime.  The  term  “Intention”   has  not  explicitly  defined  under  the  Indian  Penal 
Code, 1860 But under IPC Section 34 of it deals with common intention.  

Section 34 of IPC defines acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention. This 
section  says  that  “when  a  criminal  act  is  done  by  several  persons  in  furtherance  of  the  common 
intention  of  all,  every  such  person  is  liable  for  the  act  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  were  done  by  him 
alone.” 

This  section  requires  a  particular  criminal  intention  or  knowledge  and  the  act  should  be 
committed  by  more  than  one  person.  Everyone  who  joins  the  act  with  the  knowledge  of  the 
consequences, all of them should be made liable under this section. 

Preparation to Commit Dacoity 

Section 399 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 has talks about preparation to commit dacoity. It says 
that  whoever  makes  any  preparation  for  committing  dacoity  shall  be  punished  with  rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.   

Assembling for the Purpose of Committing Dacoity 

Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity is defined under Section 402 of the Indian Penal 
Code. It says that whoever, at any time after the passing of the act, shall be one of five or more persons 
assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 

Belonging to Gangs of Dacoits 

Belonging to gangs of dacoits is defined under Section 400 of the IPC. It says that anybody who at 
any  time  after  the  passing  of  this  act,  shall  belong  to  a  gang  of  persons  associated  for  the  purpose  of 
habitually  committing  dacoity  will  be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  life,  or  with  rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 

Page 94 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Judicial Pronouncements 
Arjun Ganpat Sandbhor vs state of Maharashtra 

In this case, a truck driver was killed and the truck was taken away by the dacoits. This incident 
took place in darkness. The evidence of the son of the deceased, who was in the truck at the time when 
the  accident  took  place  was  not  free  from  doubt.  He  admitted  at  that  time  that  he  used  to  have 
forgetting tendency. Test identification parade was not held according to guidelines prescribed under 
Criminal Manual. In the view of the totality of the evidence the accused was entitled to acquittal. 

Md Imamuddin & Anr. vs. State of Bihar  

In this case, the plea was to reduce the punishment for dacoity. Some of them were accused to 
commit dacoity in a running train. They were sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven 
years and two years for respective offences. The accused remained in custody for a substantial amount 
of  time,  about  50  per  cent  of  the  punishment.  Their  punishment  was  reduced  to  half  and  which  they 
have already passed the time in imprisonment. 

Page 95 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

MODULE 3: 

3.1 Offences against the State 
IPC Chapter VI: Sections 121 – 130 
3.2 Offences relating to Army, Navy & Air force 
IPC Chapter VII: Sections 131 – 140 
3.3 Offences against public tranquillity 
IPC Chapter VIII: Sections 141– 160 
3.4 Offences relating to public servants 
IPC Chapter IX: Sections 166 – 171 
3.5 Contempt of Lawful Authority of Public Servants 
IPC Chapter X: Sections 172 – 190 
3.6 False Evidence and Offences against public justice 
IPC Chapter XI: Sections 191 – 229A 
3.7 Offences relating to coin and government stamps 
IPC Chapter XII: Sections 230 –263A 
3.8 Offences relating to weights and measures 
IPC Chapter XIII: Sections 264 – 267 
3.9 Offences affecting the human body 
IPC Chapter XVI: Sections 299 – 377 

3.1 Offences against the State 
IPC Chapter VI: Sections 121 – 130 

All  crimes  are  seen  as  offences  against  the  state  or  the  government,  some  of  them  against  the 

state's existence, such as treason, sedition, and rebellion. 

The offences against the state lie under chapter VI of Sections 121-130 in the Indian Penal Code. 
The  purpose  of  these  sections  is  to  ensure  the  state’s  safety.  It  can  be  protected  by  giving  severe 
punishments in case of offences against the state, such as life in prison or capital punishment. 

All  states  or  countries  have  this  same  right  of  self-preservation  as  their  main  subjects.  Crimes 
such  as  waging  war  or  treason  against  the  government  lie  under  Section  121,  assaulting  high-rank 
officers  like  the  president  or  governor  lie  under  Section  124,  and  indulging  in  the  escape  of  a  state 
prisoner or a prisoner of war lies under Sections 128 to 130. 

Waging war 

Waging war is an attempt to fulfil any purpose of public nature through violence. It occurs when 
several  people  assemble  and  rise  against  the  state  to  attain  any  object  of  general  nature  by  force  or 
violence.  To  commit  an  offence  against  the  state,  the  purpose  and  the  intention  are  taken  into 
consideration and not be murdered or forced. 

Sections 121 to 123 of the Indian Penal Code deal with waging war against the government. The 
following  are  considered  as  offences  that  need  to  be  proven  to  constitute  an  offence  against  the 
government under Section 121: 

•  Wage war 
•  Attempted to wage a war 
•  Abetted the waging of war 

The preparation of war against the government lies under Section 122 of the Indian Penal code, and the 
essentials are: 
• The confiscation of arms or men from the accused person 
• Getting ready to wage war against the state or government 
• A war must be started against the state 
Section 123 deals with the secrecy of design to wage war, and the essentials of Section 123 are: 

Page 96 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• Proof of a method or design that is prepared in order to wage war against the government. 
• The act should be done in secrecy to start the war. 
• The person should be aware of the secrecy or the design of the war. 
Section 124-A deals with sedition. Sedition is the attempt made by meetings, speeches, or publications 
to disturb the state’s peace, which does not amount to treason. As per Section 124-A, the following are 
the two essentials of sedition: 
• Bringing  or  attempting  to  get  hatred  or  disaffection  towards  the  government  established  by  law  in 
India. 
• Such acts or attempts can be carried out by words, science, or visible representation. 
The punishment for sedition under Section 124-A is life imprisonment, to which the state can also add a 
fine, or imprisonment up to 3 years to which a fine can be added, or with only a fine. 

Waging war against a power 

Waging  war  against  or  attacking  any  Asiatic  Power  in  union  with  the  Government  of  India  lies 
under Section 125 in the Indian Penal Code. In this scenario, the accused person should have waged war 
against the state or provoked the waging of war. The punishment for anyone violating this section is life 
imprisonment, or imprisonment for seven years, or a fine in some cases. The essentials of Section 125 
are: 
• An Asiatic state with an international influence. 
• This state should be other than India. 
• The state should be in alliance with the Government of India. 
Assault on high-ranking officials  
Under  Section  124  Indian  Penal  Code,  assaulting  high-ranking  officials,  such  as  the  president  or  the 
governor, etc., should have been done in order to compel the governor or any high officials to stop them 
from using their lawful powers. The essentials of Section 124 are: 
• The offender should have attacked a high-ranking official of the state. 
• The offender should have restrained any high-ranking officials of the state wrongly. 
• The offender attempted to attack the high-ranking officials of the state. 
• The high-ranking officials of the state should be instigated by the accused person in order to compel 
them to use their lawful powers in an unlawful way.  
Escape of a state prisoner or a prisoner of war 
Offences  against  the  state  in  Sections  128  –  130  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  include  the  escape  of  a 
prisoner  of  war  or  a  state  prisoner.  A  state  prisoner  is  a  person  whose  imprisonment  is  necessary  to 
maintain the peace and security of the state from internal disturbances and foreign hostility. 
The essentials of Section 128 are: 
• The offender should be a public servant of the state. 
• The  prisoner  should  be  a  person  who  has  committed  a  crime  against  the  state  or  should  be  a  war 
prisoner. 
• The accused person should have custody of the prisoner. 
• The accused servant should have helped the prisoner to escape. 
The essentials of Section 129 are: 
•  Offenders should be public servants, necessarily when committing the offence. 
•  The prisoner should be in the custody of the offender. 
•  The prisoner of state should be rescued or have escaped. 
•  Such an escape or rescue should be due to the negligence of the accused person. 
The essentials of Section 130 are: 
•  The liable person should knowingly aid or attempt to help, rescue, or conceal the prisoner of state or 
war. 
•  The person should be in prison. 
•  The act should be done knowingly by the person accused. 

Page 97 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

3.2 Offences relating to Army, Navy & Air force 
IPC Chapter VII: Sections 131 – 140 

Chapter VII of Indian Penal Code, 1860 deals with offences committed by civilians in relation to 
officers in Army, Navy and Airforce of the Government of India. The main objective of this chapter is to 
maintain discipline and order in the Armed Forces of the Union.  

In  most  of  the  countries  across  the  globe,  the  defence  personnel  are  governed  by  their  own 
special  laws.  But  if  they  commit  serious  offences  (like  murder)  they  can  be  tried  by  civil  or  criminal 
courts.  However,  the  Military  Court  does  not  have  the  power  to  exercise  jurisdiction  if  the  offence  is 
committed  by  a  civilian.  Similarly,  as  per Section  139 of  the  code,  persons  who  are  subject  to  court-
martial will not be dealt with under the code. The special laws which govern them in India are:  

• The Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950); 
• The Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934); and  
• The Indian Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950). 

The correlation between Indian Penal Code, 1860 & Army Act, 1950 can be studied under the following 
table:  

Sr. 
no.  

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Indian Penal Code, 1860 

Army Act, 1950 

Sections  131  &  132  punishes 
abetment  of  mutiny  and  attempt  to 
seduce  any  officer,  soldier,  sailor  or 
airman in the Government of India.  

is  a 

Mutiny 
capital  offence 
under Section  37.  Section  37(e)- 
mutiny,  includes  any  endeavours 
to  seduce  such  personnel  from 
duty. 

any 

assault 

Sections  133  &  134  makes  abetment 
of 
officer, 
by 
soldier, sailor  or  airman  on  any 
superior  officer  in  the  execution  of 
his duty punishable. 
Sections  135  &  136  talks  about 
abetment 
and 
harbouring a deserter. 
Section  138  punishes  for  an  act  of 
insubordination by an officer, soldier, 
sailor or airman.  

desertion 

of 

Under Section  40 such 
assault 
is punishable  for  a  term  up  to  14 
years. 

Under Section  38,  deserting  and 
aiding  deserters  punishable  for 
imprisonment up to 7 years. 
An  act  of 
is 
punishable  with  7  years  of 
imprisonment under Section 42. 

insubordination 

Offences Relating to the Army, Navy and Air Force  

The classification of offences which are committed by civilians in relation to the Army, Navy and 

Air Force governed by the Indian Penal Code which can be studied in the following manner: 

िव(cid:7076)ोह का उकसाना)  
Abetment of Mutiny(िव(cid:7076)ोह का उकसाना
िव(cid:7076)ोह का उकसाना
िव(cid:7076)ोह का उकसाना

Section  131 states  that  any  person  who  abets  the  commission  of  mutiny  by  an  officer,  soldier, 
sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or Airforce or attempts to seduce an officer, soldier, sailor or airman 
from  his  allegiance  or  his  duty,  such  person  shall  be  liable  to  be  punished  with  life  imprisonment  or 
imprisonment up to 10 years and shall also be liable to fine. 

This section has two parts. First part makes abetment of mutiny punishable and the Second part 
makes an attempt of seduction punishable. It would in this way create the impression that Section 131 
applies  to  situations  where  mutiny  isn’t  committed  as  a  result  of  the  abetment.  The  offence 
contemplated  under  Section  131  is  an  abetment  which  is  not  followed  by  actual  mutiny,  or  which, 
supposing actual mutiny follows, is not the cause of that mutiny.  

Page 98 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

It was observed by the court that the offence of mutiny consist in extreme subordination as if a 
soldier resists by force, nor if a number of soldiers rise against or oppose their military superiors, such 
acts  proceedings  from  alleged  or  pretended  grievances  of  a  military  nature.  Acts  of  a  riotous  nature 
directed against the government or civil authorities rather than against military superiors seem also to 
constitute mutiny. 

Under Section  132,  If  mutiny  is  committed  as  a  consequence  of  such  abetment  by  any  officer, 
soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or Airforce then, such a person will be punished with death 
or life imprisonment or with imprisonment which may extend up to 10 years and also with fine. Both 
Sections 131 & 132 must be read together. 

Section 131, mentions that “officer”, “soldier”, “sailor” or “airman” will include any person who is 
subject  to  the  Army  Act,  1950;  the  Indian  Navy  (Discipline)  Act,  1934;  the  Air  Force  Act,  1950.  This 
explanation  was  not  there  originally  and  was  inserted  by  an  amendment  of  Act  27  of  1870  and  was 
amended by Act 10 of 1927. 

Abetment of Assault by an Officer on a Superior Officer 

Section 133 states that any person who abets any officer, soldier, sailor, or airman in the Army, 
Navy or Air Force of the Government of India to assault any superior officer who is in the execution of 
his office shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to 3 years and shall also 
be liable to fine. Section 134 provides that if an assault is committed as a result of such abetment then 
such person shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 7 years and also with 
fine.  

Sections 133 and 134 deals with abetment of assault of any officer, soldier, sailor, or airman on a 
superior  officer.  Under  Section  133,  only  abetment  of  an  assault  is  punishable  while  Section  134 
punishes the abetment of an assault when such assault is committed as an outcome of such abetment. 

Abetment of Desertion  

Under Section 135, any person who makes an abetment of desertion of any officer, soldier, sailor, 
or  airman  in  the  Army,  Navy  or  Air  Force  of  the  Government  of  India,  shall  be  punished  with 
imprisonment for 2 years or with fine or with both. Section 135 does not recognize whether abetment 
of  desertion  is  successful  or  not.  The  desertion  abetted  does  not  need  to  happen.  Mere  abetment  is 
made punishable.  

Harbouring deserter 

Section 136 states that if any person who knows or has reason to believe that any officer, soldier, 
sailor, or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the Government of India has deserted, harbours such 
officer, soldier, sailor, or airman, he shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 2 years 
or with fine or with both. The exception is given only to a wife.  

This  Section  implies  that  if  any  person  gives  harbour  (shelter)  to  an  official  who  has  deserted 
Army,  Navy  or  Air  Force  working  under  the  head  of  Government  of  India  (with  the  exception  of  the 
individuals who are relied upon to so), he shall be punished. The crux of this Section is concealment of 
the deserter to prevent his apprehension. 

Section 137 punishes the master or person in charge of a merchant vessel on board of which a 
deserter has concealed himself, even though he is ignorant of such concealment. But, some lack of care 
or maintenance of discipline has to be made out. The penalty is for a sum not exceeding 500 rupees. 
However, in this Section, the word ‘penalty’ is used, rather than the word ‘fine’. The object apparently is 
to  restrict  the  court  from  imposing  a  sentence  on  the  accused.  The  term  ‘Harbour’  has  been  defined 
under Section 52 A of the code. 

Abetment of an Act of Insubordination 

Insubordination implies refusal to obey orders. Section 138 states that any person who knows it 
to be an act of insubordination abets any officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the Military, Naval, or Air 

Page 99 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Service  of  the  Government  of  India  in  his  act  of  insubordination.  He  shall  be  held  liable  and  shall  be 
punished with imprisonment which may extend to 6 months or with fine or both if an act is committed 
in  consequence  of  such  abetment.  Section  138  says  that  any  person  who  abets  an  officer  in  his  act  of 
insubordination shall be punished only if the act is committed as a result of such abetment. 

Wearing Garb 

Section  140 states  that  any  person  who  not  being  a  soldier,  sailor  or  airman  in  the  Military, 
Naval, or Air Service of the Government of India wears a garb or wears a dress which carries a token 
belonging to any such soldier, sailor or airman with the intention that it may be believed that he is such 
a soldier, sailor or airman. Such person is liable to be punished with imprisonment up to 3 months or 
with fine which may extend to 500 rupees or both.  

This  Section  forbids  any  person  from  misleading  others  by  wearing  such  garb  and  giving  an 
impression that he is a soldier. The intention of the accused wearing the garb of a soldier is of inducing 
others to believe that he is in service at the present time. Simply wearing a uniform or carrying a token 
without  any  specific  intention  is  no  offence.  For  instance,  Actors  put  on  costumes  of  various  defence 
service personnel for their role.  
Classification of Offences 

Section  &  Definition  under 
IPC 

Punishment  

Cognizable/ 
Non- 
cognizable 

Bailable/ 
Non- 
bailable 

Triable by 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Magistrate  of 
First Class. 

Life 
imprisonment/ 
imprisonment  of  10 
years and with fine. 

Death/Life 
imprisonment/ 
imprisonment  of  10 
years and with fine. 
Imprisonment  of  3 
years  and  also  with 
fine. 

Imprisonment  of  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Magistrate  of 
First Class. 

soldier, 

committed 
of 

S.131- Abetment  of  mutiny  & 
attempt  of  seduction  of  any 
officer, 
sailor  or 
airman. 
S.132- Abetment  of  mutiny,  if 
mutiny 
in 
is 
consequence 
such 
abetment. 
S.133- Abetment  of  an  assault 
by  any  officer,  soldier,  sailor, 
airman on superior office. 
S.134- Abetment  of  an  assault 
by  any  officer,  soldier,  sailor, 
airman  on  superior  office,  if 
such assault is committed. 

S.135- Abetment of desertion. 

S.136- Harbouring deserter.  

Imprisonment  of  2 
years  or  fine  or  with 
both. 
Imprisonment  of  2 
years  or  fine  or  with 
both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

S.137- Deserter  concealed  on 
board merchant vessel. 

Penalty of Rs.500. 

Cognizable 

Non- 
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

S.138- Abetment  of  an  act  of 
insubordination.  

or 
S.140- Wearing 
carrying  token  belonging  to 
soldier, sailor, airman. 

garb 

Imprisonment  of  6 
months  or 
fine  or 
with both. 
Imprisonment  of  3 
months  or  a  fine  of 
Rs. 500 or with both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

Any 
Magistrate. 

Page 100 of 149 

 
 
 
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Proposals for Reform  

The Fifth Law Commission Report suggested certain reforms to be made under Chapter VII of the 

Indian Penal Code. Few recommendations are discussed as follows: 

• The commission recommended that this chapter should not be confined only to Army, Navy and 
Airforce  but  should  apply  to  all  the  armed  forces  in  the  Union  of  India.  Accordingly,  it 
proposed  to  change  the  heading  of  the  chapter  from  offences  relating  to  Army,  Navy  and 
Airforce to offences relating to Armed Forces. The commission also suggested that the terms 
‘Army’, ‘Navy’, ‘Air Force’ should be comprehensively defined under a new Section 130A. 

• The  commission  proposed  to  revise  Section  131,  the  commission  propounded  that  the 
punishment  of  life  imprisonment  given  in  cases  where  mutiny  is  not  committed  in 
consequence of abetment or where it is only an attempt to seduce an officer is ‘unduly heavy’. 
It  proposed  that,  if  any  person  abets the  committing  of  mutiny  by  any  officer  of  the  defence 
service personnel, and if mutiny is committed as a consequence of such abetment be punished 
with death, or life imprisonment or rigorous imprisonment of 14 years and also with fine. In 
any other case, the punishment should be imprisonment of 10 years and fine. 

• Section 135 does not differentiate between cases when the abetment of desertion happens and 
when  the  desertion  takes  place  as  a  consequence  of  abetment.  Accordingly,  the  commission 
recommended  that  under  Section  135  where  the  offence  of  desertion  actually  happens,  the 
punishment to be increased up to 5 years. 

• It recommended that existing Section 137 be omitted because the Section ‘does not appear to be 

of any consequence’. 

• It proposed to add Section 138A and Section 138B to this chapter, which relates to offences of 
‘inciting mutiny or other act of insubordination’ and ‘dissuasion from enlisting and instigating 
to mutiny or insubordination after enlistment to armed forces’ respectively, punishable with 
simple or rigorous imprisonment for a term extending up to 3 years or with fine or with both. 
• The  commission  proposed  to  increase  the  punishment  in  case  of  abetment  in  an  act  of 
insubordination  when  abetment  is  successful,  from  imprisonment  for  6  months  to  extend  it 
for a term up to 2 years. 

• The commission also suggested to revise Section 140, in order to increase the punishment from 
imprisonment of 3 months to extend it for a term up to 6 months and also with an unlimited 
fine. 

These  recommendations  of  the  Fifth  Law  Commission  were  given  effect  in  the  Indian  Penal  Code 
(Amendment) Bill,  1978. The Fourteenth Law Commission supported the proposed  changes and even 
affirmed  the  substance  of  the  1978  Bill.  Yet,  these  recommendations  have  not  been  converted  into 
statutory  provisions  as  the  Amendment  Bill  passed  in  the  Lok  Sabha  in  1978  lapsed,  due  to  its 
dissolution. 

3.3 Offences against public tranquillity 
IPC Chapter VIII: Sections 141– 160 

Offences  against  public  tranquillity  under  Indian  Penal  Code  1860  include  rioting,  unlawful 

assembly, affray, promoting enmity between groups, and disturbing religious, racial or social harmony. 

Offences  against  public  tranquillity:  Offences  against  public  tranquillity  refer  to  a  range  of 
criminal  acts  that  disturb  the  peaceful  conduct  of  public  life.  These  offenses  are  defined  in  the  Indian 
Penal Code (IPC), which is the main criminal code of India. The IPC has specific provisions to deal with 
various  forms  of  public  disturbances,  ranging  from  riots  to  affrays.  In  this  article,  we  will  discuss  the 
provisions related to offences against public tranquillity under the Indian Penal Code. 

Examples of Offences Against Public Tranquillity 

Following are the types as well as the examples of the Offences Against Public Tranquillity. The 
viewers  can  go  through  the  list  to  know  what  all  is  covered  under  the  Offences  Against  Public 
Tranquillity. 

Page 101 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Rioting (Section 146 of IPC) 

Rioting is an offense that occurs when three or more persons assemble together with a common 
objective of causing violence or damage to property. The IPC defines rioting as an offense under Section 
146. The section states that anyone who participates in a riot can be punished with imprisonment for 
up to two years, or with a fine, or with both. 

Unlawful assembly (Section 141 of IPC) 

Unlawful assembly is an offense that occurs when five or more persons assemble together with a 
common  objective  of  committing  a  crime.  The  IPC  defines  unlawful  assembly  as  an  offense  under 
Section 141. The section states that anyone who participates in an unlawful assembly can be punished 
with imprisonment for up to six months, or with a fine, or with both. 

Promoting enmity between different groups (Section 153A of IPC) 

Promoting enmity between different groups is an offense that occurs when a person deliberately 
promotes disharmony, feelings of enmity, hatred, or ill-will between different religious, racial, linguistic, 
or  regional  groups.  The  IPC  defines  promoting  enmity  as  an  offense  under  Section  153A.  The  section 
states that anyone who promotes enmity between different groups can be punished with imprisonment 
for up to three years, or with a fine, or with both. 

Outraging religious feelings (Section 295A of IPC) 

Outraging  religious  feelings  is  an  offense  that  occurs  when  a  person  deliberately  insults  or 
attempts  to  insult  the  religious  beliefs  or  feelings  of  any  class  of  citizens.  The  IPC  defines  outraging 
religious  feelings  as  an  offense  under  Section  295A.  The  section  states  that  anyone  who  outrages 
religious feelings can be punished with imprisonment for up to three years, or with a fine, or with both. 

Affray (Section 159 of IPC) 

Affray is an offense that occurs when two or more persons engage in a public fight that disturbs 
the peace. The IPC defines affray as an offense under Section 159. The section states that anyone who 
engages in affray can be punished with imprisonment for up to one month, or with a fine, or with both. 

Punishment for Offences Against Public Tranquillity 

Under the Indian Penal Code (IPC), Offences Against Public Tranquillity are listed under Chapter 
VIII,  Sections  141  to  160.  The  following  is  a  list  of  these  offences  along  with  the  corresponding 
punishment as per the IPC: 

Section 141: Unlawful assembly – Imprisonment for six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 142: Being a member of an unlawful assembly – Imprisonment for six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 143: Punishment for unlawful assembly – Imprisonment for six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 144: Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger – Imprisonment 
for up to three years, or fine, or both. 
Section 145: Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been commanded to disperse – 
Imprisonment for up to two years, or fine, or both. 
Section 146: Rioting – Imprisonment for up to two years, or fine, or both. 
Section 147: Punishment for rioting – Imprisonment for up to two years, or fine, or both. 
Section  148:  Rioting,  armed  with  a  deadly  weapon  –  Imprisonment  for  up  to  three  years,  or  fine,  or 
both. 
Section  149:  Every  member  of  unlawful  assembly  guilty  of  offence  committed  in  prosecution  of 
common object – Imprisonment for up to six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 150: Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join an unlawful assembly – Imprisonment for 
up to six months, or fine, or both. 

Page 102 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 151: Knowingly joining or continuing in an assembly of five or more persons after it has been 
commanded to disperse – Imprisonment for up to six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 152: Assaulting or obstructing a public servant when suppressing a riot, etc. – Imprisonment for 
up to two years, or fine, or both. 
Section 153: Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot – Imprisonment for up to one year, 
or fine, or both. 
Section 153A: Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, etc. – Imprisonment for up to three years, or fine, or both. 
Section 153B: Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national-integration – Imprisonment for up to five 
years, or fine, or both. 
Section 154: Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held – Imprisonment for up to 
six months, or fine, or both. 
Section 155: Liability of person for whose benefit an unlawful assembly is held – Imprisonment for up 
to six months, or fine, or both. 
Section  156:  Liability  of  agent  of  owner  or  occupier  for  whose  benefit  an  unlawful  assembly  is  held  – 
Imprisonment for up to six months, or fine, or both.  

3.4 Offences relating to public servants 
IPC Chapter IX: Sections 166 – 171 

ection  Offence 

Punishment 

Cognizable 
or 
cognizable 

non-

Bailable 
or  non-
bailable 

By  what 
court 
triable 

161 
IPC 

162 
IPC 

163 
IPC 

164 
IPC 

165 
IPC 

Being  or  excepting  to  be  a 
public  servant,  and  taking  a 
gratification other than legal 
remuneration  in  respect  of 
an official act. 

in 
Taking  a  gratification 
order,  by  corrupt  or  illegal 
means,  to  influence  a  public 
servant. 

Taking a gratification for the 
personal 
of 
exercise 
influence  with  a  public 
servant. 

Abetment  by  public  servant 
of the offences defined in the 
last  two  preceding  clauses 
with reference to himself. 

Public servant obtaining any 
thing,  without 
valuable 
consideration, from a person 
concerned in any proceeding 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Simple  imprisonment 
for  1  year  or  fine,  or 
both. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Page 103 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

or  business  transacted  by 
such public servant. 

165A 
IPC 

Punishment  for  abetment  of 
offences  punishable  under 
section 161 or section 165. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

166 
IPC 

167 
IPC 

Public  servant  disobeying  a 
direction  of  the  law  with 
intent to cause injury to any 
person. 

Public  servant  framing  an 
incorrect  document  with 
intent to cause injury. 

Simple  imprisonment 
for  1  year  or  fine,  or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine, or both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

168 
IPC 

Public  servant  unlawfully 
engaging in trade. 

Simple  imprisonment 
for  1  year  or  fine,  or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Public  servant  unlawfully 
buying 
for 
property. 

bidding 

or 

Simple  imprisonment 
for 2 years, or fine, or 
both, and confiscation 
of 
if 
property, 
purchased. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Personating a public servant 

Imprisonment  for  2 
years, or fine, or both. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Wearing  garb  or  carrying 
token used by public servant 
with fraudulent intent. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
months,  or  fine  up  to 
200 rupees, or both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

169 
IPC 

170 
IPC 

171 
IPC 

3.5 Contempt of Lawful Authority of Public Servants 
IPC Chapter X: Sections 172 – 190 

CHAPTER X - CONTEMPT OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 

IPC 
Section 

Offence 

Punishment 

Cognizable 
or 
non-
cognizable 

Bailable 
or  non-
bailable 

By  what 
triable 

court 

172 IPC 

to 

Absconding 
avoid 
service  of  summons  of 
other  proceeding  from  a 
public servant. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1  month,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Page 104 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

If  summons  or  notice 
in 
require  attendance 
person,  etc.,  in  a  Court  of 
Justice. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
of  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

173 IPC 

of 

affixing 

Preventing  the  service  of 
the 
any 
summons of notice, or the 
removal  of  it  when  it  has 
or 
been 
a 
preventing 
proclamation. 

affixed, 

If  summons,  etc.,  require 
attendance in person, etc., 
in a Court of Justice. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1  months,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months  or  fine 
of  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

174 IPC 

Not  obeying  a  legal  order 
to  attend  at  a  certain 
place  in  person  or  by 
departing 
agent, 
therefrom 
without 
authority. 

or 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1 month or fine of 
500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

the  order  requires 
If 
personal  attendance,  etc., 
in a Court of Justice. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

175 IPC 

Internationally  omitting 
to produce a document to 
a  public  servant  by  a 
person  legally  bound  to 
produce  or  deliver  such 
document. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1 month or fine of 
500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

the 

document 

If 
is 
required  to  be  produced 
in or delivered to a Court 
of Justice. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

The  court  in  which 
the 
is 
offence 
committed,  subject 
to the provisions of 
Chapter  XXVI;  or,  if 
not  committed  in  a 
Court, 
any 
Magistrate. 

The  court  in  which 
the 
is 
offence 
committed,  subject 
to the provisions of 
Chapter  XXVI;  or,  if 

Page 105 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

not  committed  in  a 
Court, 
any 
Magistrate. 

176 IPC 

Intentionally  omitting  to 
give notice or information 
to  a  public  servant  by  a 
person  legally  bound  to 
give 
such  notice  or 
information. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1 month or fine of 
500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

the 

notice 

or 
If 
information 
required 
respects  the  commission 
of an offence, etc. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

the 

notice 
or 
If 
information 
is  required 
by an order passed under 
sub-section  (1)  of  section 
356 of this Code. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

177 IPC 

furnishing 
information  to  a 

Knowingly 
false 
public servant. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

information 
the 
If 
required 
the 
commission of an offence, 
etc. 

respects 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

178 IPC 

Refusing  oath  when  duly 
required to take oath by a 
public servant. 

179 IPC 

Being  legally  bound  to 
state  truth  and  refusing 
to answer questions. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

The  court  in  which 
is 
offence 
the 
committed,  subject 
to the provisions of 
Chapter  XXVI;  or,  if 
not  committed  in  a 
Court, 
any 
Magistrate. 

The  court  in  which 
the 
is 
offence 
committed,  subject 
to the provisions of 
Chapter  XXVI;  or,  if 

Page 106 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

180 IPC 

to 

sign 

Refusing 
statement  made 
public 
legally required to do so. 

a 
to  a 
servant  when 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
3  months,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

not  committed  in  a 
Court, 
any 
Magistrate. 

The  court  in  which 
is 
offence 
the 
committed,  subject 
to the provisions of 
Chapter  XXVI;  or,  if 
not  committed  in  a 
Court, 
any 
Magistrate. 

181 IPC 

Knowingly  stating  to  a 
public  servant  on  oath  as 
true that which is false. 

182 IPC 

Giving  false  information 
to  a  public  servant  in 
order to cause him to use 
his  lawful  power  to  the 
injury  or  annoyance  of 
any person. 

Imprisonment  for 
3 years and fine. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate  of  the 
First Class 

Imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

183 IPC 

Resistance  to  the  taking 
of  property  by  the  lawful 
authority  of  a  public 
servant. 

Imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine 
or  1,000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

184 IPC 

185 IPC 

Obstructing  of  property 
offered 
by 
authority  of  a  public 
servant. 

sale 

for 

purchase 

Bidding,  by  a  person 
under  a  legal  incapacity 
it, 
to 
for 
lawfully 
property  at  a 
authorised 
or 
without 
bidding 
intending  to  perform  the 
obligations 
incurred 
there by. 

sale, 

Imprisonment  for 
1  month,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Imprisonment  for 
1  month,  or  fine 
of  200  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

186 IPC 

Obstructing 
public 
servant  in  discharge  of 
his public functions. 

Imprisonment  for 
3  months,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Page 107 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

187 IPC 

Omission  to  assist  public 
servant  when  bound  by 
law 
such 
assistance. 

give 

to 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1  month,  or  fine 
of  200  rupees,  or 
both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Wilfully  neglecting  to  aid 
a  public  servant  who 
the 
aid 
demands 
execution  of  process,  the 
prevention  of  offences, 
etc. 

in 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
6  month,  or  fine 
of  500  rupees,  or 
both. 

188 IPC 

Disobedience  to  an  order 
lawfully-promulgated  by 
a  public  servant,  if  such 
causes 
disobedience 
annoyance 
obstruction, 
to  persons 
or 
lawfully employed. 

injury 

Simple 
imprisonment  for 
1  month,  or  fine 
of  200  rupees,  or 
both. 

such 

disobedience 
If 
causes  danger  to  human 
life, health or safety, etc. 

Imprisonment  for 
6  month,  or  fine 
of  1000  rupees, 
or both. 

Non-
Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

189 IPC 

a 
public 
Threatening 
servant  with 
injury  to 
him or one in whom he is 
interested,  to  induce  him 
to do or forbear to do any 
official act. 

190 IPC 

Threatening  any  person 
to  induce  him  to  refrain 
legal 
from  making  a 
application for protection 
from injury. 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

Imprisonment  for 
1  year,  or  fine,  or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Magistrate 

3.6 False Evidence and Offences against public justice 
IPC Chapter XI: Sections 191 – 229A 

Section  Offence 

Punishment 

Cognizable  or 
non-
cognizable 

Bailable 
or  non-
bailable 

By  what 
court 
triable 

193 IPC 

Giving  or 

fabricating 

false 

Imprisonment  for 

Non-

Bailable 

Magistrate 

Page 108 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

evidence 
proceeding. 

in 

a 

judicial 

7 years and fine. 

cognizable 

of  the  first 
class. 

Giving  or 
evidence in any other case. 

fabricating 

false 

Imprisonment  for 
3 years and fine. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

194 IPC 

fabricating 

Giving  or 
false 
evidence  with  intent  to  cause 
any person to be convicted of a 
capital offence. 

Imprisonment  for 
life,  or  rigorous 
imprisonment  for 
10 years and fine. 

Non-
cognizable 

 Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

If  innocent  person  be  thereby 
convicted and executed. 

Death, 
above. 

or 

as 

Non-
cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

195 IPC 

fabricating 

Giving  or 
false 
evidence with intent to procure 
conviction 
offence 
punishable  with  imprisonment 
for  life  or  with  imprisonment 
for 7 years or upwards. 

an 

of 

The  same  as  for 
the offences. 

Non-
cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

196 IPC 

Using  in  a  judicial  proceeding 
evidence  known  to  be  false  or 
fabricated. 

The  same  as  for 
or 
giving 
false 
fabricating 
evidence 

Non-
cognizable 

According 
as offence 
of  giving 
such 
evidence 
is bailable 
or 
non-
bailable. 

by 

Court 
which 
offence  of 
giving  or 
fabricating 
false 
evidence is 
triable. 

197 IPC 

Knowingly  issuing  or  signing  a 
false  certificate  relating  to  any 
fact  of  which  such  certificate  is 
by law admissible in evidence. 

The  same  as  for 
or 
giving 
fabricating 
false 
evidence 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

198 IPC 

Using  as  a  true  certificate  one 
known  to  be  false  in  a  material 
point. 

The  same  as  for 
or 
giving 
fabricating 
false 
evidence 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

199 IPC 

False  statement  made  in  any 
declaration  which  is  by  law 

The  same  as  for 
or 
giving 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

by 

Court 
which 
offence  of 
giving 
false 
evidence is 
triable 

by 

Court 
which 
offence  of 
giving 
false 
evidence is 
triable 

by 

Court 
which 
Page 109 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
200 IPC 

201 IPC 

Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

receivable as evidence. 

fabricating 
evidence 

false 

true 
Using 
declaration known to be false. 

any 

as 

such 

The  same  as  for 
or 
giving 
fabricating 
false 
evidence 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

offence  of 
giving 
false 
evidence is 
triable 

by 

Court 
which 
offence  of 
giving 
false 
evidence is 
triable 

disappearance 
an 
of 
giving 
touching 

of 
Causing 
offence 
evidence 
false 
committed, 
to 
information 
screen  the  offender,  if  a  capital 
offence. 

it 

If 
life 
imprisonment 
imprisonment for 10 years. 

punishable 
for 

with 
or 

If  punishable  with  less  than  10 
years' imprisonment. 

Imprisonment  for 
7 years and fine. 

According 
as 
the  offence  in 
relation 
to 
which 
disappearance 
of  evidence  is 
caused 
is 
cognizable  or 
non-
cognizable. 

Bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

Imprisonment  for 
3 years and fine. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Imprisonment  for 
a  quarter  of  the 
longest 
term 
provided  for  the 
offence, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Court 
by 
which  the 
is 
offence 
triable. 

202 IPC 

Intentional  omission  to  give 
information  of  an  offence  by  a 
person legally bound to inform. 

Imprisonment  for 
6  months,  or  fine, 
or both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

203 IPC 

false 

Giving 
respecting 
committed. 

information 
offence 

an 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

204 IPC 

Secreting  or  destroying  any 
document 
its 
production as evidence. 

prevent 

to 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Page 110 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

205 IPC  False  personation 
any 

the 
purpose 
or 
proceeding in a suit or criminal 
prosecution,  or  for  becoming 
bail or security. 

for 
act 

of 

Imprisonment  for 
3 years, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable  Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

206 IPC 

removal 

Fraudulent 
or 
concealment,  etc.,  of  property 
to  prevent 
its  seizure  as  a 
forfeiture, or in satisfaction, of a 
fine  under  sentence,  or 
in 
execution of a decree. 

207 IPC 

Claiming 
property  without 
right,  or  practicing  deception 
touching  any  right  to  it,  to 
prevent  its  being  taken  as  a 
forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a 
fine  under  sentence,  or 
in 
execution of a decree. 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both. 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

(vi) Offences by public servants (sections 217 to 229, IPC). 
 [s 191] Giving false evidence.-Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of 
law  to  state  the  truth,  or  being  bound  by  law  to  make  a  declaration  upon  any  subject,  makes  any 
statement  which  is  false,  and  which  he  either  knows  or  believes  to  be  false  or  does  not  believe  to  be 
true,  is  said  to  give  false  evidence.  Explanation  1.-A  statement  is  within  the  meaning  of  this  section, 
whether it is made verbally or otherwise. Explanation 2.-A false statement as to the belief of the person  
attesting is within the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by 
stating that he believes a thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing 
which he  does not know This Chapter (comprising 44 sections: 191 to 229,  IPC) relates to  giving and 
fabricating  false  evidence  (sections  191  to  200)  and  offences  against  public  justice  (sections  201  to 
229). 

These offences may be discussed under the following sub-heads:- 
(i) Giving and fabricating false evidence (sections 191 to 200, and 204, IPC); 
(ii) Abuse of process of court (sections 206 to 211, IPC); 
(iii) False personation(वेष धारण) (sections 205 and 211, IPC); 
(iv) Disappearance of evidence and screening any offender (sections 201 to 203, and 214, IPC); 
(v) (v) Harbouring an offender (sections 212, 216 and 216A, IPC); and (vi) Offences by public servants 
(sections 217 to 229, IPC). 

[s  191]  Giving  false  evidence.-Whoever,  being  legally  bound  by  an  oath  or  by  an  express 
provision  of  law  to  state  the  truth,  or  being  bound  by  law  to  make  a  declaration  upon  any  subject, 
makes  any  statement  which  is  false,  and  which  he  either  knows  or  believes  to  be  false  or  does  not 
believe to be true, is said to give false evidence. Explanation 1.-A statement is within the meaning of this 
section, whether it is made verbally or otherwise. Explanation 2.- A false statement as to the belief of 
the  person  attesting  is  within  the  meaning  of  this  section,  and  a  person  may  be  guilty  of  giving  false 
evidence  by  stating  that  he  believes  a  thing  which  he  does  not  believe,  as  well  as  by  stating  that  he 
knows a thing which he does not know. 

3.7 Offences relating to coin and government stamps 

Page 111 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

IPC Chapter XII: Sections 230 –263A 

Section  Offence 

Punishment 

Cognizable 
or 
cognizable 

non-

Bailable 
or  non-
bailable 

what 

By 
court 
triable 

231 IPC 

Counterfeiting, 
or 
performing  any  part  of  the 
process  of 
counterfeiting 
coin. 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

232 IPC 

Counterfeiting, 
or 
performing  any  part  for  the 
process  of 
counterfeiting 
coin. 

for 
Imprisonment 
life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

233 IPC 

Making,  buying  or  selling 
instrument  for  the  purpose 
of counterfeiting Indian coin. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

234 IPC 

Making,  buying  or  selling 
instrument of the purpose of 
counterfeiting Indian coin. 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

234 IPC 

Possession  of  instrument  or 
material  for  the  purpose  of 
using 
for 
counterfeiting coin, 

same 

the 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

If Indian coin. 

Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

236 IPC 

in 

Abetting, 
India, 
the   counterfeiting,  out  of 
India, of coin. 

punishment 

The 
provided 
for  
abetting 
counterfeiting 
such 
India. 

the 
of 
coin  within 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

237 IPC 

238 IPC 

or 

Import 
of 
counterfeit  coin,  knowing 
the same to be counterfeit. 

export 

or 

export 

Import 
of 
counterfeit  of  Indian  coin, 
knowing  the  same  to  be 
counterfeit. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Imprisonment 
for 
life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

Page 112 of 149 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

239 IPC 

Having  any  counterfeit  coin 
known  to  be  such  when  it 
came  into  possession,  and 
delivering,  etc.,  the  same  to 
any person. 

Imprisonment  for  5 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Section  Offence 

Punishment 

Cognizable 
or 
cognizable 

non-

Bailable 
or  non-
bailable 

what 

By 
court 
triable 

240 IPC 

Same with respect to Indian 
coin. 

Imprisonment  for  10 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session 

of 

241 IPC 

Knowingly  delivering 
to 
another any counterfeit coin 
as  genuine,  which,  when 
first possessed, the deliverer 
did  not 
to  be 
know 
counterfeit. 

Imprisonment  for  2 
fine,  or  10 
years, 
times the value of the 
coin 
counterfeited, 
or both. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

242 IPC 

Possession  of  counterfeit 
coin  by  a  person  who  knew 
it  to  be  counterfeit  when  he 
became possessed thereof. 

243 IPC 

Possession of Indian coin by 
a  person  who  knew  it  to  be 
counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof. 

244 IPC 

Person  employed  in  a  Mint 
causing  coin  to  be  of  a 
different 
or 
composition  from  that  fixed 
by law. 

weight 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

245 IPC 

Unlawfully  taking  from  a 
coining 
Mint 
instrument. 

any 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

246 IPC 

Fraudulently 
diminishing 
the  weight  or  altering  the 
composition of Indian coin. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class. 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

247 IPC 

diminishing 
Fraudulently 
the  weight  or  altering  the 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 

Page 113 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

composition of Indian coin. 

248 IPC 

Altering  appearance  of  any 
coin  with  intent  that it  shall 
pass  as  a  coin  of  a  different 
description. 

249 IPC 

appearance 

Altering 
of 
Indian  coin  with  intent  that 
it  shall  pass  as  a  coin  of  a 
different description. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

250 IPC 

Delivery  to  another  of  coin 
possessed 
the 
knowledge that it is altered. 

with 

Imprisonment  for  5 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

251 IPC 

Indian  coin 
Delivery  of 
possessed 
the 
with 
knowledge that it is altered. 

252 IPC 

Possession  of  altered  coin 
by  a  person  who  knew  it  to 
be  altered  when  he  became 
possessed thereof. 

253 IPC 

Possession of Indian coin by 
a  person  who  knew  it  to  be 
altered  when  he  became 
possessed thereof. 

Imprisonment  for  10 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Imprisonment  for  5 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

254 IPC 

Delivery  to  another  of  coin 
as genuine which, when first 
possessed,  the  deliverer  did 
not know to be altered. 

Imprisonment  for  2 
years  or  fine,  or  10 
times the value of the 
coin. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

255 IPC 

Counterfeiting 
Government stamp. 

a 

for 
Imprisonment 
life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Court 
Session. 

of 

256 IPC 

Having  possession  of  an 
instrument  or  material  for 
of 
purpose 
the 
counterfeiting 
a 
Government stamp. 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

257 IPC 

Making,  buying  or  selling 
instrument  for  the  purpose 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 

Page 114 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

counterfeiting 

of 
Government stamp. 

a 

258 IPC 

Sale 
of 
Government Stamp. 

counterfeit 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

259 IPC 

Having  possession  of  a 
Government 
counterfeit 
stamp. 

Imprisonment  for  7 
years and fine 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

260 IPC 

261 IPC 

as 

genuine 

Using 
a 
Government  stamp  known 
to be counterfeit. 

bearing 
stamp, 

Effacing  any  writing  from  a 
a 
substance 
Government 
or 
removing  from  a  document 
a  stamp  used  for  it,  with 
intent  to  cause  a  loss  to 
Government. 

Imprisonment  for  7 
fine,  or 
years,  or 
both. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Imprisonment  for  3 
years, or fine or both. 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

262 IPC 

Using  a  Government  stamp 
known  to  have  been  before 
fine, used. 

Imprisonment  for  2 
years or fine, or both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

263 IPC 

Erasure  of  mark  denoting 
that stamps have been used. 

Imprisonment  for  3 
fine,  or 
years,  or 
both. 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

263A 
IPC 

Fictitious stamps 

Fine of 200 rupees 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

Any 
Magistrate. 

3.8 Offences relating to weights and measures 
IPC Chapter XIII: Sections 264 – 267 

264 
IPC 

Fraudulent 
instrument for weighing 

use 

of 

false 

Imprisonment 
year, or fine, or both 

for  1 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate. 

265 
IPC 

Fraudulent use of false weight 
or measure 

Imprisonment 
year, or fine, or both 

for  1 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

266 
IPC 

Being  in  possession  of  false 
weight 
for 
fraudulent use 

or  measures 

Imprisonment 
year, or fine, or both 

for  1 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

Page 115 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

267 
IPC 

Making or selling false weights 
or measures for fraudulent use 

Imprisonment 
year, or fine, or both 

for  1 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

3.9 Offences affecting the human body 
IPC Chapter XVI: Sections 299 – 377 

1. Of Offences Affecting Life ( Section 299 – 311) 

No one has the right to take anyone’s life, which the author(s) believe to be beautiful in fullness. 
This  sub-chapter,  probably  the  most  “famous”,  given  the  basal  instincts  it  excites  in  everyone  of  us, 
explains the gravity of fulfilling such treacherous acts. Provisions relating to “homicide” are dealt with 
spot on, some others are still up for debate. 

2. Of The Causing Of Miscarriage, Of Injuries To Unborn Children, Of The Exposure Of Infants, And 
Of Concealment Of Births (Section 312 – 318) 

A  perpetrator  will  not  ever,  before  committing  a  crime  (read  sin),  discriminate  on  the  basis  of 
the age of the innocent if he so has decided to carry out his motive. Thus, to provide support not only to 
the prudent man who knows his rights, this Chapter brings into consideration infants or even unborn 
lives and gives prime importance to save their lives, along with the mother. 

3. Of Hurt (Section 319 -338) 

It is very difficult to ascertain the nature of “hurt” caused or suffered by a person. A slight line, 
demarcating  the  bodily  hurts  which  are  serious  and  which  are  slight,  is  seen  everyday  parlance.  This 
Chapter draws the attention to the importance of intention, inter alia, while dealing with cases specific 
to the acts constituting hurt. 

4. Of Wrongful Restraint & Wrongful Confinement (Section 339 – 348) 

Independence  to  move  freely  is  an  inalienable  right.  Take  this  freedom  away  from  anybody, 
coupled with a slight use of force, and the person starts questioning his very existence. The basic aim of 
the provisions contained in this Chapter is to dilute the suffering caused by that curtailment of freedom 
and to punish the perpetrators, accordingly. 

5. Of Criminal Force & Assault (Section 349 – 358) 

Any  force  used  in  pursuance  of  causing  some  apprehension/actual  injury  to  the  other  person 
and its punishment thereof is dealt here. It is, however, very important to discern the nature of the force 
used to make sure that proper punishment is meted out. 

6. Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery And Forced Labour (Section 359 – 376) 

The  provisions  in  this  Chapter  regarding  kidnapping  as  an  offence  has  the  ultimate  vision  to 
provide  security  and  protection  not  only  to  the  guardians,  but  most  importantly,  to  the  wards 
themselves.  Not  to  limit  the  scope  of  this  Chapter,  the  clauses  on  abduction  fills  the  void  of  age 
restriction. Similarly, as no one has a ‘for granted’ right over any other person’s life, slavery and forced 
labour  are  dealt  with  emphasised  scrutiny.  The  most  infamous  provisions  regarding  the  growing 
menace  of  rape  in  the country  are  enlightened  here,  too.  The  above-mentioned  provisions are  always 
under the ever watchful eyes of the public and because of this reason, are always in a state of flux 

7. Of Unnatural Offences (Section 377) 

Recent  uproar,  both  at  the  national  and  global  level  has  resulted  in  re-looking  and  amending 
some of the contestable tenets of this section. The fact that a great amount of misconception and social 
ostracism  are  still  the  aftermaths  goes  on  to  show  the  infantile  stage  we  are  at.  Whether  the  social 
upheaval, judicial and legislative changes will change anything is to be seen. 

Page 116 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

MODULE 4: 

4.1 Offences relating to elections 
IPC Chapter I: Sections 171A – 171I 
4.2 Offences affecting public health safety, convenience, decency and morals 
IPC Chapter XIV: Sections 268 – 298 
4.3 Offences relating to religion 
IPC Chapter XV: Sections 295 – 298 
4.4 Offences against property 
IPC Chapter XVII: Sections 378 – 462 
4.5 Offences relating to documents and property marks 
IPC Chapter XVIII: Sections 463 – 499E 
4.6 Offences relating to marriage 
IPC Chapter XX: Sections 493 – 498 
4.7 Cruelty by husband or relatives of the husband 
IPC Chapter XX-A: Section 498A 
4.8 Defamation 
IPC Chapter XXI: Section 499 
4.9 Criminal Intimidation, Insult and Annoyance 
IPC Chapter XXII: Sections 503 – 505 

4.1 Offences relating to elections 
IPC Chapter I: Sections 171A – 171I 

Chapter  IXA, Section  171 deals  with  offenses  related  to  Elections 

in  the Indian  Penal 
Code. Elections in India are no short of a festival and concern the people immensely. This Chapter was 
introduced  by Section  2 of  the Indian  Elections  Offences  and  Inquiries  Act,  1920,. It  prescribes 
punishments  for  offences  such  as  bribery,  personation,  undue  influence,  making  false  statements  to 
malign someone’s reputation during elections, etc. The main object of this chapter is to ensure free and 
fair elections and to allow people to freely practice their voting rights. 

Page 117 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Objective 

In terms of political affairs, liberty and equality are the fundamental factors to ensure concerning 
the  concept  of  free  and  fair  elections.  Free  and  fair  elections  connote  that  nobody  is  influenced  while 
exercising their legal right; that they can make and form decisions on their own, and have their personal 
choice  free  from  the  bondage  of  another,  without  any  malice  or  undue  influence  of another. Elections 
are crucial to ensure the smooth running of a state and must be carried out in a fair manner. When a 
person castes his/her vote, he/she is not under any influence or control of a party discipline, religion, 
sex, language, caste, creed, etc. One is also not bound to corrupt practices such as bribery or using cheap 
tactics  to  smear  someone’s  election  campaign.  Thus,  free  and  fair  elections  are  the  epitome  of  a 
democratic nation. 

Offences relating to Elections in Indian Penal Code 
Bribery 

As  per Section  171B,  a  person  is  said  to  commit  bribery  when  he/she  gives  gratification  to 
someone with the object of inducing such person with regards to practicing his/her electoral right, or as 
a reward, after such person has exercised his/ her electoral right after being induced. The person taking 
such  bribe  and  being  induced  into  practicing  his/her  electoral  right  differently  is  also  guilty  of  the 
offence of bribery. 

For this section, a person is said to give gratification when they offer/attempt to give/ offer or 
attempt  to  procure  gratification.  The  person  accepting  or  attempting  to  get  gratification  for  changing 
his/her pre-decided course and acting according to the wish of the one giving such gratification shall be 
said to have received gratification. 

A  person  committing  the  offence  of  bribery  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  which  may 
extend to one year, or a fine, or both, under the provisions of Section 171E. However, a person bribed 
by the act of treating shall have to pay a fine only. “Treating” means providing or accepting food, drink, 
entertainment or provision as gratification. 

Undue influence at an election 

Section 171C deals with undue influence at an election. It refers to the voluntary interruption or 
an attempt to interrupt the free exercise of an electoral right. Interference with the free exercise of an 
electoral right as per this provision includes- 

• Threatening  (with  injury  of  any  kind)  a  candidate  or  a  voter  or  a  person  in  whom  a 

candidate/voter is interested in, or; 

• Misleading  or  attempting  to  induce  a  candidate/voter  to  believe  that  they,  or  any  person  that 

they are interested in, shall be subjected to Divine displeasure or spiritual censure. 
Exercise  of  a  legal  right  without  any  mala  fide  intent  to  interfere  with  someone’s  voting  right, 
declaration  of  public  policy  or  a  promise  of  public  action  does  not  count  as  interference  as  per  the 
meaning of this section. 

As per Section 171F, undue influence at an election is punishable with imprisonment which may 

extend to one year, or a fine, or both. 
Personating at an election 

Section 171D says that a person attempting to vote twice or vote by using unfair means is guilty 
of the offense of personation. Each one is to cast their own vote. For example, a person applying for a 
voting paper by using someone else’s name, whether living or dead, or under a fictitious name, or has 
voted  in  such  an  election  and  wants  to  vote  again  is  guilty  of  personation.  A  person  abetting  or 
attempting to procure a voting paper by using any other person for their cause shall also be guilty of the  
offense of personation. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  a  person  authorized  to  vote  as  proxy  for  an  elector  under  any  law 

which is at force at that time shall not be guilty of this offence. 

Page 118 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Personation at an election is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or a 

fine, or both as per Section 171F. 

False statement in connection with an election 

Section 171G states that whoever makes/publishes a statement in public, knowing/believing it 
to be false or not believing it to be true, and disguising it to be a statement of fact, with an attempt to 
malign the character or conduct of a candidate to disrupt the result of elections shall be punishable with 
fine. 

Illegal payments in connection with elections 

As per Section 171(h), a person responsible for incurring/authorizing expenses to promote their 
election campaign, which may include holding public meetings, press conferences, advertising, circulars 
or publications, without any general or special authority in writing of a candidate shall be punishable 
with a fine which may extend to Rs. 500. 

However,  if  such  a  person,  who  has  borne  expenses  not  exceeding  Rs.  10  without  authority 
manages  to  obtain  authority  in  writing  of  the  candidate  within  days  from  the  date  on  which  such 
expenses  were  incurred,  this  provision  would  not  be  applicable  as  such  person  would  be  deemed  to 
have acted with the permission of the candidate. 

Failure to keep election accounts 
As per Section 171(i) of the Code, a person who is responsible for keeping an account for the expenses 
incurred  in  connection  with  an  election,  as  per  the  law  which  is  in  force  at  that  time  or  as  per  a  rule 
which has the force of law, when fails to do so, shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up to 
Rs. 500. 

Suggested Reforms 

The Fifth Law Commission proposed certain reforms to the currently existing Chapter IX-A of the 
IPC relating to substantial changes. However, none of these provisions had been taken into accord and 
compiled to date. The reforms include- 

• Amending the definition of ‘electoral rights’- The current definition is exclusive of the right of a 
candidate to withdraw his/her candidature from elections. The definition should be modified 
to include the phrase “ to withdraw or not to withdraw” his/her candidature. 

• The  subclauses  related  to  bribery  and  its  prescribed  punishment  i.e  Section  171B  and  171E 

should be combined as one section for a better understanding. 

• The  offense  of  bribery  shall  be  taken  seriously  and  a  relatively  stringent  punishment  must  be 
prescribed  for  it  as  it  certainly  interferes,  to  a  large  extent,  with  a  smooth  and  fair  election 
process. 

• The  definition  of  undue  influence  is  to  be  narrowed  down  and  supposed  to  include  violent 

means of interfering with the free exercise of legal rights. 

• Similar  to  the  recommendation  of  bribery,  both  subclauses  relating  to  personation  i.e.  IPC 

Sections 171D and 171F should be combined for a better understanding. 

• The  punishment  for  making  false  statements  must  be  made  more  stringent  as  it  may  have 
adverse  impacts  on  the  minds  of  people  and  the  reputation  of  the  candidate.  Instead  of 
dismissing with a fine only, imprisonment for a period extending up to 2 years is suggested. 
• The  commission  also  deleted  Section  171F  and  171I  as  they  have  become  redundant  and 

obsolete. 

However, none of these recommendations were taken into account by the legislature or the fourteenth 
law commission. 

Landmark Judgments 
E Anoop v State of Kerala, 2012 

Page 119 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The petitioner had allegedly appeared at the polling station at Mokeri Government U.P. School in 
Peringalam constituency, and changed his name and presented himself as Kuttikkattu Pavitharan in the 
polling booth. He did so to obtain a voting paper even though he wasn’t the person he claimed to be, nor 
was  he  a  person  belonging  to  that  constituency/booth.  The  court held him  guilty  of  the  offense  of 
personation under Section 171D and 171F. 

Iqbal Singh v. Gurdas Singh, 1975 

In  this case,  the  respondent  was  elected  from  a  constituency  in  Punjab  as  a  Member  of 
Parliament. The petitioner alleged that a minimum of 15,000 invalid votes had been cast, due to which 
the respondent had been declared elected, and that the accused had allegedly distributed huge sums of 
money  to  Harijans  under  the  pretext  of  aiding  them  to  construct  Dharamshalas,  and  also  gave  out 
several gun licenses as gratification to induce voters to vote for them. 

The appellant contended that this gratification was liable to be admitted as the corrupt practice 

of bribery and that the free legal rights of voters had been influenced and tampered with. 
The accused failed to establish that 15,000 invalid votes had been cast. According to Rule 56 of Election 
Rules, a ballot paper devoid of both, the mark and signature of the polling officer shall be invalid. The 
same was not the case here. 

“Gratification”,  if  to  be  included  under  bribery,  shall  only  be  used  to  refer  to  cases  where  a 
material  advantage  is  conferred  on  offering  a  gift.  The  license  given  in  this  case  did  not  provide  any 
material  advantage  and  hence  couldn’t  be  said  to  be  included  under  bribery.  Apart  from  that,  bribery 
necessities the existence of bargaining of votes. Since there was no evidence regarding the bargaining of 
votes in exchange for gun licenses, the issues did not stand ground and the case was dismissed. 
Raj Raj Deb vs Gangadhar, 1962 

The  respondent  was  the  younger  brother  of  the  Raja  of  Puri  in  Odisha.  The  petitioner  alleged 
that  the  appellant  wrongly  used  this  fact  to  his  benefit  during  election  campaigning  in  the  district  of 
Satyapadi, where he said that he was “Chalanti Bishnu” himself, and induced people to vote for him by 
saying that if they don’t do so, they will be displeasing Lord Jagannath himself and every vote given to 
him was a vote given to Lord Jagannath. He threatened Divine displeasure and spiritual displeasure if 
his directions were not followed. Apart from that, he was also alleged that the appeals had been made to 
the villagers to cast their votes on the ground of his caste, Khandayat. He also used Nila Ghakra, which is 
the religious symbol of Lord Jagannath for his election campaigning.  

The court held it to contravene Section 171F of IPC. 
Veeraghavan v. Rajnikanth, 1997 

The respondent, Mr. Rajnikanth is an established film actor with a massive fan following all over 
Indian and especially in Tamil Nadu. The petitioner, a lawyer in the Supreme Court has accused him of 
exercising undue influence over people as on the eve of the election, the respondent presented a tele-
campaign presentation where he urged the voters to accept Rs 500 or Rs. 1000 from the petitioner, and 
still not vote for him. 

The  issue  was  whether  this  would  attract  IPC  Section  171B,  which  deals  with  bribery  and  IPC 

Section 171C, which deals with undue influence. 

The speech, as translated said that the voters of Tamil Nadu couldn’t be swayed by these tactics 
and  couldn’t  be  corrupted;  therefore,  if  the  opponent  offered  money  as  a  bargain  for  votes,  do  not 
hesitate and accept it, but still, exercise their legal rights freely as the people of Tamil Nadu could not be 
bought. 

The Court said that the respondent in the speech never advised to demand and receive a bribe. 
The offending speech wasn’t so offending and it had no trace of mandate or imposition of restraint on 
the voters to refrain from doing what they wished to do. The said sections of IPC were not applicable 
and the respondent was thereby not guilty of any offense and the case was dismissed. 

4.2 Offences affecting public health safety, convenience, decency and morals 

Page 120 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

IPC Chapter XIV: Sections 268 – 298 
Section 268:- Public nuisance 
Section 269:- Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life 
Section 270:- Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life 
Section 271:- Disobedience to quarantine rule 
Section 272:- Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale 
Section 273:- Sale of noxious food or drink 
Section 274:- Adulteration of drugs 
Section 275:- Sale of adulterated drugs 
Section 276:- Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation 
Section 277:- Fouling water of public spring or reservoir 
Section 278:- Making atmosphere noxious to health 
Section 279:- Rash driving or riding on a public way 
Section 280:- Rash navigation of vessel 
Section 281:- Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy 
Section 282:- Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel 
Section 283:- Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation 
Section 284:- Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance 
Section 285:- Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter 
Section 286:- Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance 
Section 287:- Negligent conduct with respect to machinery 
Section 288:- Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings 
Section 289:- Negligent conduct with respect to animal 
Section 290:- Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for 
Section 291:- Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue 
Section 292:- Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc. 
Section 293:- Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person 
Section 294:- Obscene acts and songs 
Section 294A:- Keeping lottery office 

4.3 Offences relating to religion 
IPC Chapter XV: Sections 295 – 298 

295 
IPC 

Destroying,  damaging  or  defiling  a 
place  of  worship  or  sacred  object 
with  intent  to  insult  the  religion  of 
any class of persons 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

295A 
IPC 

Maliciously  insulting  the  religion  or 
the religious beliefs of any class 

Imprisonment  for 
2 years, or fine, or 
both 

Cognizable 

Non-
bailable 

Magistrate 
of  the  first 
class 

296 
IPC 

297 
IPC 

Causing 
assembly 
worship 

a  disturbance 

engaged 

in 

to 

an 
religious 

Imprisonment  for 
1  year,  or  fine,  or 
both 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

Trespassing  in  place  of  worship  or 
sepulcher,  disturbing  funeral  with 
intention to wound the feelings or to 

Imprisonment  for 
1  year,  or  fine,  or 
both 

Cognizable 

Bailable 

Any 
Magistrate 

Page 121 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

insult  the  religion  of  any  person,  or 
offering indignity to a human corpse 

298 
IPC 

Uttering  any  word  or  making  any 
sound  in  the  hearing  or  making  any 
gesture,  or  placing  any  object  in  the 
sight of any person, with intention to 
wound his religious feeling 

Imprisonment  for 
1  year,  or  fine,  or 
both 

Non-
cognizable 

Bailable 

Any Mag 

4.4 Offences against property 
IPC Chapter XVII: Sections 378 – 462 
1) Theft. 
2) Extortion. 
3) Robbery and dacoity. 
4) Criminal misappropriation of property. 
5) Criminal breach of trust. 
6) Receiving stolen property 
7) Cheating. 
8) Fraudulent deed and disposition of property. 
9) Mischief. 
10)  Criminal trespass 

Offenses relating to Property -  
1) Theft – 
       Section 378 to Section 382 of the Indian Penal Code speaks about theft in detail Section 378 of the 
Code  defines  Theft  and  Section  379  provides  punishment  for  Theft.  According  to  Section  378  of  the 
Indian Penal Code, Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession 
of  any  person  without  that  person's  consent,  moves  that  property  in  order  to  such  taking  is  said  to 
commit theft. 

Theft, Punishment for theft (Section 378 to Section 382) 
2) Extortion – 

Section 383 of the Indian Penal Code defines extortion and Section 384 of the Indian Penal Code 
provides punishment for extortion. Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that 
person,  or  to  any  other,  and  thereby  dishonestly  induces  the  person  so  put  in  fear  to  deliver  to  any 
person any property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a 
valuable security, commits "extortion". 

Extortion: Offences against property (Indian Penal Code 1860) 
3) Robbery and dacoity – 
       Section  390  defines  Robbery  and  Section  392  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  provides  punishment  for 
robbery.  Section  391  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  defines  dacoity.  Section  395  of  the  Indian  Penal 
Code  prescribes  the  punishment  for  dacoity  which  may  be  either  imprisonment  for  life  or  rigorous 
imprisonment up to 10 years and fine. 

Robbery and Dacoity (Section 390 to Section 402 of the Indian Penal Code) 
4) Criminal misappropriation of property  

Section  403  and  Section  404  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  deals  with  Criminal 
Misappropriation of Property. Section 403 of the Indian Penal code defines criminal misappropriation 

Page 122 of 149 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

and  prescribes  the  punishment  for  the  offence.  Section  404  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  deals  with 
dishonest misappropriation of a deceased persons property 

Criminal Misappropriation of Property: Offences against Property. 
5) Criminal breach of trust. 
         Section 405 to Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 speaks about Criminal Breach of Trust, 
Section  405  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  Defines  Criminal  Breach  of  Trust,  Section  406  provides 
punishment for criminal breach of trust. Section 407 Criminal breach of trust by carrier etc, Section 408 
Criminal Breach of trust by clerk or servant, Section 409 Criminal breach of trust by a public servant or 
banker or by merchants or agent. 

Criminal breach of trust (Section 405 to Section 409 of The Indian Penal Code ) 
6) Receiving stolen property 
            Section  410  to  Section  414  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860  deals  with  Receiving  Stolen  property. 
Stolen property is defined under Section 410 of the Code.  

Receiving Stolen Property (Section 410 to Section 414 of the Indian Penal Code 1860) 
7) Cheating. 
         Chapter  XVII,  Section  415  to  Section  420  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860  deals  with  'cheating'. 
Cheating is defined under Section 415 of the Indian Penal Code.  Section 415 deals with three types of 
cheating. 
cheating. 

punishment 

prescribes 

Section 

Penal 

Code 

417 

the 

for 

of 

Cheating: Offences against Property (Section 415 to Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860) 
8) Fraudulent deed and disposition of property. 
     Chapter XVII, Section 421 to Section 124 of The Indian Penal Code 1860 deals with Fraudulent deed 
and disposition of property. 

9) Mischief. 

Section  425  to  Section  440  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860,  deals  with  provision  to  Mischief. 
Section  425  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  1860  defines  Mischief,     Section  426  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code, 
1860 provides punishment for mischief. 

10)  Criminal trespass –  

      Section 442 to Section 462 Deals with Criminal Trespass. 

4.5 Offences relating to documents and property marks 
IPC Chapter XVIII: Sections 463 – 499E 

Section 463:- Forgery 
Section 464:- Making a false document 
Section 465:- Punishment for forgery 
Section 466:- Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc. 
Section 467:- Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
Section 468:- Forgery for purpose of cheating 
Section 469:- Forgery for purpose of harming reputation 
Section 470:- Forged document 
Section 471:- Using as genuine a forged document 
Section  472:-  Making  or  possessing  counterfeit  seal,  etc.,  with  intent  to  commit  forgery  punishable 
under section 467 
Section  473:-  Making  or  possessing  counterfeit  seal,  etc.,  with  intent  to  commit  forgery  punishable 
otherwise 

Page 123 of 149 

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 474:- Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing it to be forged 
and intending to use it genuine 
Section  475:-  Counterfeiting  device  or  mark  used  for  authenticating  documents  described  in  section 
467, or possessing counterfeit marked material 
Section  476:-  Counterfeiting  device  or  mark  used  for  authenticating  documents  other  than  those 
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material 
Section 477:- Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable security 
Section 477A:- Falsification of accounts 
Section 478:- (Repealed) Trade Mark. 
Section 479:- Property mark 
Section 480:- (Repealed) Using a false trade mark. 
Section 481:- Using a false property mark 
Section 482:- Punishment for using a false property mark 
Section 483:- Counterfeiting a property mark used by another 
Section 484:- Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant 
Section 485:- Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark 
Section 486:- Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark 
Section 487:- Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods 
Section 488:- Punishment for making use of any such false mark 
Section 489:- Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury 
Section 498A:- Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes 
Section 489B:- Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes 
Section 489C:- Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes 
Section  489D:-  Making  or  possessing  instruments  or  materials  for  forging  or  counterfeiting  currency 
notes or bank-notes 
Section 489E:- Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes 

4.6 Offences relating to marriage 
IPC Chapter XX: Sections 493 – 498 

A generally accepted definition of marriage is that of matrimony or wedlock, which is a culturally 
recognised  social  sanction  of  union  between  two  people.  This  union  helps  in  establishing  rights  and 
obligations  between  two  people  coming  together  in  this  union,  along  with  their  children,  and  the  in-
laws.  

However, the sacrosanct institution of marriage has been existing through generations and has 
consumed  in  itself  various  distorted  versions  of  the  same.  To  correct  them,  and  subsequently,  make 
sure that no innocent life suffers. Different laws and precedents have been brought in by various courts, 
with  the  most  illuminating  ones  being  from  the  Hon’ble  Apex  Court.  Such  misbehaviours,  namely: 
adultery,  desertion,  or  cruelty,  amongst  others,  are  known  to  be  offences  against  marriage  or 
matrimonial offences.  

Instances  of  matrimonial  offences  continue  to  rise  incrementally  and  remain  undisturbed 
despite  the  various  protective  laws  made  by  the  legislation,  and  steps  taken  by  the  law  and  order 
maintainers of the society. With each passing day, more and more women are added into the list of the 
victims of these legal offences.  

What  is  worse  is  that  most  of  these  cases  go  unreported,  due  to  the  society’s  reluctance  to 
acknowledge  its  morbid  parts  and  victim-shaming.  The  situation  goes  further  south  when  that  is 
clubbed with insecurity and an uncertain future. Society, especially women, are made to have little to no 
faith in the law. They usually get scared of the long, unending legal battles, and get afraid of the massive 
amount of resources needed to sustain them.  

The Burden of Proof (BoP) lies upon the plaintiff urging the offences. Proving said matrimonial 
offences result in the grounds for divorce and continues to be important in applications in magistrates’ 

Page 124 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

courts for financial relief during and after the marriage. In this article, we shall be discussing several of 
these legislations and landmark case judgements. 

Offences relating to Marriage 

Offences  pertaining  to  marriage  are  provided  in Sections  493  to  498,  of  the Indian  Penal  Code, 
1860 (IPC). These laws deal with the various aspects of a marriage, and their subsequent felonies. The 
most  illuminated  of  these  is Section  498-A,  otherwise  known  as  The  Cruelty  Law.  This  law,  along 
with The  Domestic  Violence  Act (Passed  in  2005),  aims  to  provide  substantial  protection  to  female 
victims of cruelty and domestic violence. With the incrementally increasing cases of such nature, it was 
observed that such legislation was necessary to ensure that the Fundamental Right to Life and Dignity, 
entrusted  upon  each  citizen  by  the  Constitution  of  India,  is  complied  with.  Furthermore,  cruelty  was 
also made to be a substantial ground for the dissolution of a marriage, too. 
Other sections of chapter XX include: 
• Mock marriages (Section 493); 
• Bigamy (Section 494 and 495); 
• Fraud Marriage (Section 496) 
• Adultery (Section 497); 
• Criminal elopement (Section 498); 

Cohabitation(सहवास
छल से)  inducing  a  belief  of  marriage(िववाह के  िव(cid:7393)ास को (cid:7079)े(cid:7407)रत 
सहवास)  after  deceitfully(छल से
िववाह के  िव(cid:7393)ास को (cid:7079)े(cid:7407)रत 
िववाह के  िव(cid:7393)ास को (cid:7079)े(cid:7407)रत 
िववाह के  िव(cid:7393)ास को (cid:7079)े(cid:7407)रत 
छल से
छल से
सहवास
सहवास
करनाकरनाकरनाकरना) 

Section  493  is  for  every  man  who  deceives  a  woman  into  having  carnal  intercourse  with  him 
under the pretext that she is married to him. For this, the Indian Penal Code provides for a ten-year jail 
term, with a fine. This section has been a topic of heated debate amongst lawmakers for a considerable 
amount of time.  

पित या प(cid:7360)ी के  जीवनकाल म(cid:7286) दोबारा शादी करना) 
Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife(पित या प(cid:7360)ी के  जीवनकाल म(cid:7286) दोबारा शादी करना
पित या प(cid:7360)ी के  जीवनकाल म(cid:7286) दोबारा शादी करना
पित या प(cid:7360)ी के  जीवनकाल म(cid:7286) दोबारा शादी करना

Section  494  states  that  marrying  again  during  the  lifetime  of  the  spouse  is  bigamy  (read 

with)  Sec 50 of the Evidence Act and Section 198 (1)(c) of CrPC. 
However, the section provides for exceptions to Section 494 of IPC, viz: 
(a) If the first marriage has been declared void by the following: 
           -by a court, 
           -holding competent jurisdiction  
(b) If the previous spouse has been continuously absent for a period of seven years and  
           -not heard of as being alive 
           -provided that the facts are disclosed to the person with whom the second marriage is contracted.  
The aforementioned offence is termed as bigamy. It can be afflicted by either of the spouses on to one 
another.  

For  a  better  understanding  of  the  aforementioned  provision, Section  17  of  the  Hindu  Marriage 
Act and Section 108 of the Evidence Act along with the judgment of the Supreme Court in the landmark 
judgement of Smt. Sarla Mudgal vs Union Of India & Ors (1995) must be referred to. This case laid down 
the  principles  against  the  practice  of  solemnizing  second  marriage  by  conversion  to  Islam,  with  first 
marriage  not  being  dissolved.  The  verdict  discusses  the  issue  of  bigamy,  the  conflict  between  the 
personal  laws  existing  on  matters  of  marriage  and  invokes Article  44  of  the  Indian  Constitution.  It  is 
considered a landmark decision that highlighted the need for a Uniform Civil Code. 

Concealing the previous marriage before subsequently getting wed 

Section 495 talks about a ten year incarceration period, with fine, for a person who hides their 
former marriage with someone they are getting married to. It is a non-cognizable, bailable offence, with 
the trial being carried out by first class Magistrate. 

Fraudulent conduction of wedding ceremony without a lawful, genuine marriage 

Page 125 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Section 496 provides for a jail term extending up to as long as seven years, along with a fine, for anyone 
who  dishonestly,  clubbed  with  a  fraudulent  intention,  goes  through  the  wedding  ceremony,  despite 
knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married. 

Adultery 

Earlier, Section 497 gave way for a jail term up to five years, with or without a fine, to a person 
who  had  sexual  intercourse  with  the  wife  of  another  man  without  the  consent  or  connivance  of  that 
man. If it was not rape, the man would be guilty of the offence of adultery. Meanwhile, in such a case, the 
wife would not be punishable as an abettor.  

It  is  important  to  note  that  this  law  has  since  been  decriminalized  but  continues  to  be  strong 

grounds for divorce. 

Enticing a married woman for illicit sexual relations  

Section 498 of the IPC provides for a two-year jail term, with or without a fine, for anyone who 
takes, or conceals, or detains, or entices away, any woman who is and whom he knows or has reason to 
believe to be- the wife of any other man, with the intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any 
person. 
The deceit and fraudulent intention should exist at the time of the marriage. 
The essential ingredients of Sections 493 and 496 are as follows: 

1.  the accused must have deceived the woman,  
2.  as a consequence of which she is led to believe that she is lawfully married to him, though in 

reality, she is not. 

Thereby, mens rea an essential component of both these sections. The words ‘deceit’, ‘dishonestly’ and 
‘fraudulent intention’ have been used in Sections 493 and 496 respectively. This means that in both the 
sections while the man remains aware that they are not married, the woman is cheated on by the man 
into believing the same to be true. 

Landmark Judgments 

In a landmark case of Subhransu Sekhar Samantray v. The State (2002), the Orissa High Court 
contended  that  the  statement  of  the  prosecutrix  that  she  had  resisted  the  establishment  of  sexual 
relations with the accused, but when he put vermillion on her head  and declared her as his wife, and 
alleged that he would accept her status in his life publicly after getting a job she submitted herself to his 
advances, is sufficient to constitute an offence under Section 493 of the IPC. 

In Kashuri  v.  Ramaswamy  (1978),  the  court  said,  “the  proof  of  sexual  intercourse  has  to  be 

inferred from the facts and circumstances of a case as direct evidence can rarely be proved”.  

When the question about Section 498 arises, a landmark decision is taken to be that of Alamgir 
v.  State  of  Bihar  (1958),  wherein  the  court  said  that  “if a man knowingly goes away with the wife of 
another  in  such  a  way  to  deprive  the  husband  of  his  control  over  her,  with  the  intent  to  have  illicit 
intercourse, then it would constitute an offence within the meaning of Section 498”.  

The Apex Court, in the case of Mohd. Hoshan vs. State of A.P (2002) concluded that the issue of 
cruelty,  by  one  upon  the  other  is  essentially  a  question  of  fact,  and  is  quite  subjective  in  nature.  The 
impact of complaints, accusation or taunts on a person amounting to cruelty depends on various factors 
of the victim, viz: sensitivity, socio-economic background, education etc. 
The court further elaborated that mental cruelty varies from person to person- depending on: 

• the intensity of the sensitivity, 
• degree of courage, and, 
• Endurance to withstand such cruelty, and that each case has to be dealt with on an instant case 

basis. 

However,  as  these  reforms  have  made  their  way  into  the  legislation  over  the  course  of  the  past  two 
decades, a common criticism witnessed against laws relating to matrimonial offences in India has been 

Page 126 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

that  women  misuse  these  laws.  This  allegation  has  often  been  made  by  various  sectors  including  the 
police, politicians and even judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court.  
The allegation of misuse is made particularly against Section 498A and also against the offence of dowry 
death  in Section  304B.  The  Supreme  Court  less  than  a  decade  ago,  in  the  landmark  case  of Sushil 
Kumar Sharma vs. Union of India and others (2005), observed that the object of the provision was to 
prevent the dowry menace. But many instances have since come to light where the complaints are not 
in good faith and have been filed with perverse motive.  

Sometimes unfavoured, unwanted media coverage adds to the misery. However, the 243rd  Law 
Commission’s Report, which came out in August 2012, observed that the misuse of law is not a ground to 
remove the provision from its efficacy since what is involved is a larger societal interest. 
The question, thus involved is which remedial measures must be taken to prevent such abuse of well-
intentioned legislation. The constitutionality and intra vires nature of the law definitely isn’t a licence 
for people to harass others for personal vendetta. It thus becomes necessary for the lawmakers to find 
out methods of how frivolous complaints or allegations can be appropriately dealt with. 

Less  than  a  decade  ago  in  another  case  of Arnesh  Kumar  v.  the  State  of  Bihar  and  Anr 
(2014) the Supreme Court declared with particular reference to Section 498A, that no arrest should be 
made  immediately  in  the  offences  which  are  allegedly  committed  by  the  accused  and  the  offence  is 
cognizable and non-bailable, and went on to lay down crisp guidelines for the police officers to follow 
relating  to  the  arrests  made  under  the  section,  due  to  increase  in  a  number  of  seemingly  false 
complaints. 

4.7 Cruelty by husband or relatives of the husband 
IPC Chapter XX-A: Section 498A 

In these modern days of equal rights, the antiquated rituals of dowry and female servitude are 
still revered. Section 498A was added to the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to prevent the threat of dowry and 
cruelty to women. Section 498A of the IPC protects women’s rights  and empowers them. Extortion of 
any  kind  of  property  by  subjecting  a  woman  to  cruelty  is  criminal  under Section  498A of  the  Indian 
Penal Code,1860 On December 26, 1983, the Government of India revised the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(IPC)  with  the Criminal  Law  (Second  Amendment)  Act,  1983,  inserting  a  new  Section  498(A)  under 
Chapter XX-A of the Indian Penal Code. The Section was passed in response to the possibility of dowry 
deaths.  

Section  113A of  the Indian  Evidence  Act,  of  1872 was  inserted  by  the  same  Act  to  enhance  the 
presumption of abetment of suicide by a married woman. The primary goal of Section 498A is to protect 
a  woman  who  is  being  mistreated  by  her  husband  or  his  family.  It  is  the  sole  part  of  the  IPC  that 
criminalises domestic abuse against women. 

The  author  has  explored  Section  498A  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860,  in  this  article  by 
explaining  its  historical  context  and  elements.  The  article  will  also  discuss  the  importance  of  this 
Section, as well as its penal measures. 

Historical background of Section 498A IPC 

Cruelty  instances  were  frequent  earlier  as  well,  with  occurrences  such  as  humiliating  women 
and  stripping  occurring  notably  among  women  of  lower  castes,  but  no  such  research  on  women  and 
marital  cruelty  was  undertaken.  Therefore,  very  little  data  is accessible  before  the  British  Era.  Family 
and  marriage  have  been  crucial  in  both  the  pre-independence  and  post-independence  movements  in 
India. The women’s movement in the 1970s and 1980s emphasized such assaults on women as cruelty 
inside the family; it also highlighted and attacked the techniques through which the state rejected and 
ignored instances of cruelty. 

Section 498A was enacted in 1983 in response to a great concern about women meddling with 
the rise in fatalities of young women caused by “accidental kitchen fires.” It was later determined that 
the  fatalities  were  caused  by  dowry  harassment  of  married  women.  Furthermore, Section  304B,  also 

Page 127 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

known  as  “dowry  death,”  was introduced  in  IPC  in  1986.  The  present  remedies  were  implemented  to 
reinforce the Dowry Act of 1961. Women have since invoked Section 498A in cases of cruelty and other 
forms of abuse. Until 2005, this was the sole remedy available. Women found it difficult to report it to 
the local police station. 

Unless  they  showed  proof,  the  police  did  not  take  their  cases  seriously.  To  lessen  the  horrible 
occurrences, the Government of India adopted the Dowry Prohibition Bill, 1959, on April 24, 1959. The 
Dowry  Prohibition  Act  of  1961  was  passed  in  a  joint  session  of  Parliament  and  took  effect  on  July  1, 
1961.  In  1984  and  1986,  the  Act  was  revised  twice.  Certain  campaigns,  such  as  the  demonstrations 
against Rameezabee’s rape in Hyderabad in 1978 and their call for a fresh trial of the acquitted officers 
accused of rape in 1980 in Mathura, as well as the absurd accusations of dowry-related killings, became 
symbols  of  a  new  phase  in  feminist  public  protest.  There  were  incidences  of  violence  against  women 
during the colonial period. 

With  the  conclusion  of  the  Emergency  in  1977,  India’s  Women’s  Movement  entered  its  second 
phase.  Many  fatalities  occurred  in  Delhi  around  this  period,  disguised  as  suicides  or  accidents.  Even 
during  the  anti-dowry  campaign,  feminists  linked  many  forms  of  violence  against  women  to  dowry 
demands. They were solely focused on spouses’ brutality towards women. As the movement gathered 
traction,  many  formerly  taboo  topics  were  brought  to  light  and  examined.  Women  began  to  speak  up 
and share their stories. Many incidences of violence emerged as the campaign progressed throughout 
the  1980s.  Before  1983,  there  was  no  specific  legislation  governing  domestic  violence.  In  response  to 
the demands of women’s campaigners for laws against violence, the Indian government gladly altered 
the criminal Act provisions in 1983 and 1986. 

Section 498A IPC  

In  recent  years,  marriage  disagreements  have  increased  dramatically.  In  this  nation,  the 
institution  of  marriage  is  highly  cherished.  Section  498A  was  created  with  the  express  purpose  of 
combating  the  threat  of  harassment  a  woman  could  experience  from  her  husband  and  his  family. 
According  to  Section  498A,  whoever,  being  the  husband  or  a  relative  of  the  husband  of  a  woman, 
subjects such woman to cruelty must be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to three years and 
a fine. The term cruelty, as defined under the Act, means; 

1.  Any  intentional  behaviour  that  poses  a  serious  risk  to  the  woman’s  life,  limb,  or  health 

(whether physical or mental) or that is likely to provoke suicidal ideation; 

2.  Harassing  the  woman  with  the  intent  to  coerce  her  or  any  person  connected  to  her  into 
satisfying any unlawful demand  for any property or valuable security or because she or any 
connected person failed to satisfy the demand. 

(cid:7059)ू रता क(cid:7409) अवधारणा) 
The concept of cruelty((cid:7059)ू रता क(cid:7409) अवधारणा
(cid:7059)ू रता क(cid:7409) अवधारणा
(cid:7059)ू रता क(cid:7409) अवधारणा

Cruelty  has  been  defined  broadly  to  encompass  inflicting  physical  or  emotional  injury  on  the 
woman’s body or health, as well as engaging in acts of harassment to persuade her or her relatives to 
satisfy any unlawful demand for any property or valued security. One of the components of ‘cruelty’ is 
creating a circumstance that drives a woman to commit suicide. 

In Kaliyaperumal vs. State of Tamil Nadu (2003),  cruelty  was  ruled  to  be  an  essential  feature  of 
crimes  under  both  Sections  304B  and  498A  of  the  IPC.  People  who  have  been  found  not  guilty  under 
Section 304B for the crime of dowry death may nevertheless be found guilty under Section 498A of the 
IPC since the two provisions do not overlap, but each constitutes a separate offence. 

The definition of cruelty is provided in the explanation of Section 498A. Section 304B does not 
define  it,  but  the  definition  of  cruelty  or  harassment  in  Section  498A  applies  to  Section  304B  as  well. 
The IPC’s Section 498A defines cruelty as an offence when it occurs by itself, but Section 304B defines 
dowry death as an offence when it happens during the first seven years of marriage. However, Section 
498A makes no mention of such a time frame. 

In another case, Inder Raj Malik vs. Sunita Malik (1986), It was found that pestering a woman to 
force  her  or  any  associated  parties  to  comply  with  an  unlawful  demand  for  any  property  or  valuable 
Page 128 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

security falls under the concept of ‘cruelty’. The husband was found guilty of aiding in his wife’s suicide 
under Section  306 of  IPC  because  the  husband  had  an  unlawful  connection  with  another  woman  and 
used to beat her, which constituted continuous cruelty as defined by Section 113A of the Evidence Act 
of 1872. 

Ingredients of Section 498A IPC 
The following elements must be present for an offence under Section 498A to be committed: 

1.  The woman must be married; 
2.  She must have experienced abuse or harassment; and  
3.  The abuse or harassment must have been perpetrated by the woman’s spouse or a relative of 

her husband. 

A cursory examination of this provision reveals that the term ‘cruelty’ encompasses the occurrence of 
the following act(s): 

1.  Any deliberate actions that put a woman’s life, limb, or safety in peril or that might force her to 

commit suicide; 

2.  A woman’s physical or mental well-being; 
3.  Harassing a woman if she is being harassed compels her or any other person associated with 

her to comply with an unlawful demand for any property or valued security. 

Status of offence 
When discussing the status of an offence under this Section, the following points must be considered. 

1.  The  accusation  under  Section  498A  is  considered  a  serious  offence  and  is  a  non-bailable 
offence under the law. Bail is the temporary release of a suspect/prisoner in exchange for the 
provision of security for presence at a later hearing. 

2.  Because  of  the  egregious  nature  of  the  offence,  Section  498A  is  a  cognisable  offence. 
Cognisable  offences  are  those  in  which  a  police  officer  has  the  authority  to  arrest  a  person 
without a warrant. 

3.  Apart from this, Section 498A is non-compoundable. 

Section   Offence 

Punishment 

Is 
it 
cognisable or 
not? 

Is 
it 
bailable 
or not? 

What 
court  will 
hear 
the 
case? 

498A 

cruelly 
a 

Punishment 
for 
treating 
married 
woman. 

Three  years 
in  jail  and  a 
fine. 

Cognisable 
if 
the  officer  is 
provided 
information 
about 
commission 
of the offence. 

the 

It  is  not 
bailable. 

First-class 
Magistrate. 

Observation of the Malimath Committee  

The Home Ministry formed the Justice Malimath Committee in 2000 to look into ways to improve 
the  criminal  justice  system.  Following  a  thorough  examination  of  Section  498A,  it  was  concluded  that 
the statute had some flaws and recommended revisions. The committee highlighted that Section 498A, 
being  non-bailable  and  non-compoundable,  works  against  both  the  husband  and  wife’s  interests 
because; 

1.  It  presents  a  significant  barrier  to  the  return  of  marriage  connections  between  the  split 

couple, as such complaints taint partnerships for life. 

2.  Because the case against the husband/relatives is non-compoundable, the case against them 

remains, notwithstanding the parties’ reconciliation. 

3.  Because it is not bailable, it creates severe harassment of husbands and families in the event of 

spurious allegations. 

Page 129 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Concerned  about  the  egregious  abuse  of  this  rehabilitative  tool, “the crime being non-bailable and non-
compoundable  causes  an  innocent  person  to  suffer  disgrace  and  hardship,” the  committee  proposed 
making 498A a bailable and compoundable offence. 

Section 498A and Section 304B IPC 

The Hon’ble Supreme Court dealt with a conviction for dowry death under Section 304B of the 
IPC  in Smt. Shanti & Anr. vs. State of Haryana, (1990).  The  issue  at  hand  was  whether  the  provisions  of 
Sections  304B  and  498A  of  the  IPC  were  mutually  exclusive  and  whether  the  appellants’  exoneration 
from the violation punishable by Section 498-A made any difference at all. Since there was an acquittal 
under Section 498A of the IPC, the Apex Court examined the above-mentioned provisions in paragraph 
4 of the decision. The court did, however, make the following observation that the mere acquittal of the 
appellants under Section 498A, under these circumstances makes no difference in this case. 

These  Sections  498A  and  304B  address  two  different  offences.  True,  “cruelty”  is  a  common 
essential in both parts, and this must be proven. The definition of “cruelty” is given in the Explanation to 
Section  498A.  There  is no  such  definition  of  “cruelty”  in  Sec.  304B,  but  given  the  similarities  between 
both offences, we must assume that “cruelty or harassment” has the same meaning as that given in Sec. 
498A, which states that “cruelty” by itself constitutes an offence and is penalised. 

As  previously  stated,  “dowry  death”  is  penalised  under  Sec.304B,  and  such  death  must  have 
happened within seven years of the marriage. There is no such term indicated in Section 498A, and the 
husband or his relative would be responsible for ‘cruelty’ to the wife at any point after the marriage. It 
should  also  be  noted  that  a  person  accused  and  acquitted  under  Sec.304B  can  be  convicted  under 
Sec.498A  without  a  charge  if  such  a  case  is  made  out.  However,  from  the  standpoint  of  practice  and 
procedure  and  to  avoid  technical  flaws,  it  is  necessary  in  such  cases  to  frame  charges  under  both 
Sections. If the case is established, they can be found guilty under both Sections, but Section 498A does 
not  require  a  separate  sentence  because  Sec.  304B  already  provides  a  substantive  sentence  for  the 
major offence. 

In the case of Arun Garg v. State of Punjab (2004), which was reported much later, this issue was 
raised  once  more.  The  Hon’ble  Court  concluded  that  Sections  304-B  and  498-A  of  the  IPC  are  not 
mutually exclusive. They address a variety of specific offences. Cruelty is a frequent theme in both parts. 
Cruelty,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an  offence  and  is  penalised  under  Section  498A.  Dowry  death  is 
punishable  under  Section  304B,  and  it  must  have  occurred  within  seven  years  of  the  marriage.  Sec. 
498A makes no mention of such a time. 

Furthermore, if a case is made out, a person prosecuted and acquitted under Section 304B might 
be  convicted  under  Section  498A  without  a  particular  accusation.  In  the  current  matter,  the  learned 
Session Judge, in addition to condemning the accused to imprisonment for up to ten years under Section 
304B, levied a fine of Rs. 2,000. The Supreme Court ruled firmly against the lower court’s ruling, stating 
that it was not authorised to impose a fee as a penalty under Section 304B. 

498A IPC and Section 113A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 

Section  113A  of  the  Evidence  Act,  coupled  with  Section  498A  of  the  Penal  Code,  1860,  was 

enacted in 1983 to establish the presumption of abetment of suicide by a married woman. 
According to the Section, if a woman commits suicide within 7 years of marriage after being exposed to 
cruelty  by  her  husband  or  in-laws,  it  is  presumed  that  such  suicide  was  aided  by  the  husband  or  the 
husband’s relatives. In such a circumstance, the husband or his family bears the burden of proving the 
opposite in court as held in the case of Pinakin Mahipatray Rawal v. State of Gujarat (2013). 

Section 498A IPC and domestic violence 

The  introduction  of  Section  498A  IPC  prohibiting  cruelty  towards  married  women  is  crucial  to 
the Domestic  Violence  Act  of  2005 (DV  Act).  The  distinction  between  498A  and  DV  Act  is  that 
proceedings  under  the  former  are  governed  by  the Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973,  whilst 

Page 130 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

procedures  under  the  latter  are  governed  by  the Code  of  Civil  Procedure,  1908.  Thus,  proceedings 
under IPC 498A and DV Act can go concurrently. 

Dowry and Section 498A IPC 

Dowry was a customary practice in India’s old marriage system, in which riches were handed to 
the groom’s family from the bride’s. The Dowry Prohibition Act of 1961 made this practice both socially 
unacceptable and a criminal offence. The terms ‘unlawful demands’ bring up the link between 498A and 
dowry laws. 

Need for Section 498A IPC 

Male  culture  has  traditionally  treated  women  with  harshness.  Laws  like  this  assist  women  in 
fighting back. Women have the impression that they are being heard. In a country like India, regulations 
like this are desperately needed – 

1.  In  2021,  there  were  almost 6.8  thousand recorded  dowry  death  cases  in  India.  As  a  result, 

these laws are desperately needed to protect women from maltreatment. 

2.  Women  are  constantly  coerced,  tormented,  intimidated,  or  mistreated  to  obtain  something. 

Section 498A of the IPC allows women to go to court and punish the perpetrator. 

3.  In many situations, a woman is subjected to emotional torture as well. No legislation can assist 
the woman in alleviating her emotional anguish. Acts like this benefit women in a  variety of 
ways. 

4.  The  laws,  no  matter  how  misapplied,  cannot be  removed  from  the  Indian  Penal  Code.  There 

will be some gaps, but a provision may always be inserted to close them. 

Section 498A IPC punishment  

All those found guilty will either be sentenced to a term of jail that may last up to three years or 
will be required to pay a fine under the Section 498A penalty. The Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act of 2005, the Indian Evidence Act of 1872, and other laws are relevant to this Section of the 
IPC. 

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 deals with cases where the woman is believed to have died as a 
result of horrific physical and mental abuse or cruelty as part of the dowry. This Section’s application is 
still  valid  for  another  seven  years.  Therefore,  it  applies  to  situations  where  the  wife  kills  herself  or 
passes away during the first seven years of the marriage. In 498A proceedings, Section 306 of the IPC 
also has a considerable impact. The punishment for assisting someone in taking their own life is either a 
fine or a term of jail of any kind that can last up to 10 years. 

FIR under Section 498A IPC 

If  a  woman  has  been  wronged,  whether  it  be  physical,  emotional,  or  sexual  mistreatment,  she 
should not be afraid to seek help from the authorities. Authorities should be contacted in order to get 
justice, punish the wrongdoers, and protect the victim from future harm inflicted by such a spouse or 
his family. Aside from engaging a skilled criminal lawyer, the initial step is to submit an FIR. The police 
should be contacted right away, and an FIR should be filed on behalf of the victim. 
If the victim has been seriously injured or is unable to travel to the police station to file a physical or 
written complaint/FIR, any other friend or family member may do so. If physically attending the police 
station is not possible, a call to the Police Helpline at 100 should be made. Once such a complaint is filed 
with the police, he or she must quickly document it in order for the victim to proceed with legal action. 
A  police  report,  often  known  as  an  FIR,  is  the initial  step  in taking  legal  action  against  the accused  or 
perpetrator. 

Page 131 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Who is eligible to file a complaint under Section 498A of the IPC 

A  First  Information  Report  (FIR)  or  complaint  under  Section  498A  IPC  is  required  to  initiate 
criminal proceedings against the husband or his family, according to Section 198A CrPC. The following 
individuals may file such a complaint: 
1.  The aggrieved party,  
2.  The married lady,  
3.  The aggrieved party,  
4.  Her mother, brother, sister,  
5.  father’s or mother’s brother or sister, and 
6.  With  the  court’s  approval,  any  individual  connected  to  such  a  lady  by  blood,  marriage,  or 

adoption. 

The limitation period for filing a 498A complaint  

The  complaint  must  be  submitted  within  a  specific  amount  of  time.  According  to Section 
468 CrPC, the complaint regarding the  violations under 498A  must be made within three years of the 
claimed  last  incidence  of  cruelty.  When  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  justice,  the  court  may  grant 
cognizance of such a crime even after the statute of limitations has expired. 

Section 498A trial and court procedure 

As previously indicated, the trial or criminal court procedure begins with the filing of an FIR or a 

police report. The following is a comprehensive trial procedure: 

1.  FIR  (First  Information  Report)  /  police  complaint: The  first  step  is  to  submit  a  First 
Information  Report.  This  is  addressed  under Section  154 of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure. 
An FIR is the starting point for the entire case. 

2.  Officer inquiry and report: Following the filing of the FIR, the Investigation Officer begins an 
investigation.  Following  an  appraisal  of  the  facts  and  circumstances,  evidence  collecting, 
individual  examination,  and  other  applicable  steps,  the  officer  completes  and  prepares  the 
investigation. 

3.  Charge-sheet presentation to Magistrate: Following that, the police bring the charge sheet 
before the magistrate. The charge sheet is a list of all of the criminal charges brought against 
the accused. 

4.  Framing of charges/discharge: After the accused and their attorneys have seen the charge 
sheet, the court moves on to framing the charges, which entails informing the accused of the 
offences  with  which  they  have  been  charged  them.  This  is  also  the  stage  at  which  the 
Magistrate  may  decide  that  there  is  no  prima  facie  evidence  to  prosecute  the  accused  and 
discharge him. 

5.  Arguments  in  court  and  charges  framing: On  the  scheduled  hearing  day,  the  Magistrate 
hears the arguments from the parties on the charges that have been set before framing them. 
6.  Plea  of  guilty: Section  241 of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1973  discusses  the  plea  of 
guilty.  Following  the  formation  of  the  allegations,  the  accused  is  given  the  opportunity  to 
plead  guilty,  and  it  is  the  judge’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  guilty  plea  was  made 
voluntarily. At his or her discretion, the judge may condemn the accused. 

7.  Prosecution evidence:  Following the drafting  of the allegations and the accused’s plea of not 
guilty, the prosecution presents the evidence first, bearing the initial burden of proof. Oral and 
documentary evidence can both be produced. The magistrate has the power to call anybody as 
a witness or to order the production of any document. 

8.  Cross-examination  of  witnesses  by  the  accused’s  lawyer:  When  prosecution  witnesses  are 
called before the court, they are cross-examined by the accused’s counsel after examination-
in-chief. 

Page 132 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

9.  If the accused has any evidence in his or her defence, it is offered to the Courts at this point. 
He/she  is  given  this  opportunity  to  strengthen  his/her  case.  However,  because  the 
prosecution has the burden of proof, the accused is not compelled to produce evidence. 

10. Prosecution cross-examination of witnesses: The accused or his or her lawyer cross-examines 

prosecution witnesses in court. 

11. Evidence/conclusion:  If  the  accused  has  any  evidence,  it  is  presented  to  the  courts  at  this 
point.  He  or  she  is  given  this  opportunity  to  bolster  his  or  her  argument.  The  accused, 
however, is not required to present evidence because the prosecution has the burden of proof. 
12. Oral/final  arguments:  The  stage  of  final  arguments  is  nearing  the  end  of  the  process.  In  this 
case, both sides (the prosecution and the defence) take turns making final oral arguments in 
front of the court. 

13. Court’s decision: The Court bases its judgment on the facts and circumstances of the case, as 
well  as  the  arguments  and  evidence  offered.  The  Court  renders  its  final  judgment  after 
explaining its grounds for acquitting or condemning the accused. 

14. Acquittal  or  conviction:  If  the  accused  is  found  guilty,  he  or  she  is  convicted;  if  found  not 

guilty, the accused is acquitted. 

15. Hearing  to  determine  the  quantum  of  the  sentence  if  convicted: If  the  accused  is  found 
guilty  and  sentenced  to  jail  time,  a  hearing  will  determine  the  quantum,  or  extent,  of  the 
sentence. 

16. Appeal  to  higher  courts: An  appeal  to  the  higher  courts  is  possible  if  the  conditions  allow. 
The person can file an appeal with the High Court and in further stages can file an appeal with 
the Supreme Court. 

In a case under Section 498A, is bail an option 

When  someone  has  been  charged  with  a  crime,  the  court  may  issue  a  written  authorization 
called bail that will let them avoid going to jail. Only the magistrate may issue bail under Section 498A 
once  the  police  officer  has  recorded  the  complainant’s  FIR.  However,  as  time  progressed,  the  Hon’ble 
Supreme  Court  of  India  issued  judgments  that  gradually  restricted  the  threat  arrests  made  under 
Section 498A of the IPC.  

In  the  landmark  case  of Arnesh Kumar v/s State of Bihar & Another (2014),  the  Supreme  Court 
ruled that no arrest should be made just because the charge is non-bailable and cognizable, and hence it 
is  permissible  for  police  personnel  to  do  so.  The  fact  that  the  ability  to  arrest  exists  is  one  thing;  the 
rationale for using it is quite another. Aside from the authority to arrest, police personnel must be able 
to defend their actions. A person cannot be arrested routinely just on a mere accusation of committing 
an infraction. It is smart and wise for a police officer to make no arrest until reasonable satisfaction is 
gained after some examination of the veracity of the claim. 

Over time, actions have been conducted  with  the interests of all of society’s members in mind. 
Pre-litigation mediation at Crime Against Women (CAW) Cell/Mahila thana is one of these processes. In 
spite  of  the  pre-FIR  mediation  and  counselling,  the  woman  has  the  option  of  filing  the  FIR  if  she  so 
chooses. The FIR cannot be withdrawn by the  complainant, but the High Courts have the authority to 
nullify it under Section 482 of the CrPC. 

However, it is better advised to get anticipatory bail once the FIR has been filed. The court may 
set  specific  restrictions  on  the  accused  when  he  or  she  requests  anticipatory  bail.  One  of  the 
requirements might be depositing a demand draft in the name of the wife or other dependents as part 
of maintenance or another obligation.  However, when there is a particular provision for wife and child 
maintenance, conditional anticipatory bail issued under Section 498A would be illegal. 

Is it possible to file an appeal in a Section 498A case 

A  lower  court’s/subordinate  court’s  decision  or  order  can  be  appealed  to  a  higher  court  using 
this process. Either party to the dispute before the lower court may file an appeal. The person who is 
appealing  or  reversing  a  decision  is  known  as  the  appellant,  and  the  court  to  which  the  appeal  was 

Page 133 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

submitted is known as the Appellate Court. A party to a case has no inherent right to appeal a court’s 
decision  or  order  to  a  higher  or  more  superior  court.  An  appeal  can  be  lodged  only  if  it  is  expressly 
permitted by law and must be filed in the required manner in the relevant courts. An appeal should also 
be submitted within a reasonable time frame. 

If there are strong reasons for it, an appeal can be filed with a higher court. A district/magistrate 
court decision can be appealed to the Sessions Court. An appeal from the Sessions Court can be brought 
to the High Court and from the High Court to the Supreme Court. If the facts warrant, both the wife and 
the  accused  may  file  an  appeal.  Any  individual  convicted  on  a  trial  before  a  Sessions  Judge  or  an 
Additional Sessions Judge, or on a trial before any other court, and sentenced to more than 7 years in 
jail for himself or another person in the same trial may appeal to the High Court. 

Issues with Section 498A 
Protection is exclusively available to married women 

Section 498A only protects married women from domestic abuse committed by their husbands 
or  other  family  members.  The  definition  thus  ignores  and  delegitimizes  the  regular  violence 
experienced by concubines, girlfriends and fiances. 

Ambiguous definition of cruelty 

The  definition  of  cruelty  provided  in  Section  498A  is  vague  and  narrow,  and  it  does  not 
encompass  all  types  of  abuse  suffered  by  women.  Women’s  experiences  demonstrate  that  they 
encounter  physical,  mental,  linguistic,  psychological,  sexual,  and  economic  assault.  Section  498A  only 
addresses aggression against the body and the mind. Due to the significant frequency of sexual violence 
in marriage and the fact that marital rape is notably not included in the definition of rape under Section 
376 of the Indian Penal Code, sexual violence in particular has to be recognised as a form of cruelty. 
The difficulty of establishing cruelty “beyond reasonable doubt” 

According  to  Section  498A  of  the  IPC,  the  spouse  and  his  family  must  be  proven  to  have  been 
cruel beyond a reasonable doubt, which is a prerequisite of criminal law. When abuse occurs inside the 
walls of a house, it is incredibly difficult and nearly impossible to demonstrate physical or mental abuse 
beyond a reasonable doubt. 

Misuse of Section 498A 

A  breach  of  this  provision,  its  purposes,  and  its  ambitions  is  on  the  rise,  with  women  bringing 
frivolous  false  claims  against  their  husbands  to  get  rid  of  them  or  just  harm  the  family.  Abuse  of  this 
Section  is  on  the  rise,  and  well-educated  women  are  fully  aware  that  it  is  both  cognisable  and  non-
bailable, and swiftly operates on the woman’s allegation and places the male behind the jail. Like in the 
case of Savitri Devi v. Ramesh Chand & Ors (2003), the court concluded unequivocally that the provisions 
had been abused and exploited to the point where they were undermining marriage itself and proving 
to be detrimental to society as a whole. 

The court held that to stop this from happening, legislators and government officials needed to 
assess the current circumstances and applicable laws. This Section was designed to safeguard married 
women  from  dishonest  husbands,  but  it  has  been  abused  by  a  few  women,  as  stated  in Saritha  v  R. 
Ramachandran (2002),  where  the  court  noted  the  contrary  trend  and  requested  the  Law  Commission 
and Parliament to make the offence non-cognisable and bailable. 

Although  making  the  offence  non-cognisable  and  bailable  is  opposed  by  many  women’s  rights 
organisations,  who  believe  that  doing  so  provides  the  accused  an  opportunity  to  avoid  prosecution. 
However,  this  would  offer  the  individual  a  fair  opportunity  and,  more  importantly,  assist  achieve  the 
goals of justice. 

Justice must defend the weaker and make sure that the aggrieved person has an opportunity to 
recoup what is rightfully theirs. When wives accuse their husbands of crimes under Section 498A IPC, 
which makes the offence non-bailable and cognisable, the man does not have an opportunity to obtain 
justice as soon as possible if he is innocent, as justice delayed is justice denied. Therefore, the legislators 

Page 134 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

must  submit  a  suggestion  for  how  to  make  this  Section  impartial  toward  everyone  so  that  those  who 
commit crimes are punished, and those who have been injured receive justice. 

They  still  require  rights  to  function  effectively  in  society  but  frequently  ignore  others’  rights 
while their own are protected. Today’s educated women must support the idea of equality and demand 
it, but the tendency is gradually changing. Based on the rights guaranteed to them, women are taking 
advantage of the fact that they are considered the weaker sex and are abusing the rights of others. 
The Supreme Court directives to the police to prevent misuse 

From  limiting  the  arbitrary  use  of  the  arrest  authority  under  Section  498A  of  the  Indian  Penal 
Code,  the  Supreme  Court  issued  some  much-needed  direction  in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar (2014) 
when  police  may  arrest  without  a  warrant  and  related  topics.  In  this  case,  the  petitioner,  who  was 
facing  arrest  in  a  case  brought  under  Section  498A,  filed  an  SLP  before  the  Supreme  Court  after  his 
previous attempt to obtain such relief was denied by the high court. The appellant-husband demanded 
Rs. 8 lakhs, a Maruti automobile, and an air conditioner, among other things, and threatened to remarry 
if such demands were not satisfied. 

To  minimise  unwarranted  arrests  of  the  accused,  the  Apex  Court  issued  the  following  required 

directives in this case to the police: 

1.  All  state  governments  should  direct  their  police  officers  not  to  arrest  automatically  when  a 
case  under  Section  498A  of  the  IPC  is  lodged,  but  rather  to  determine  the  need  for  arrest 
based on the standards outlined above in Section 41, Cr. PC. 

2.  All  police  officers  are  given  a  checklist  comprising  specific  sub-clauses  under Section 

41(1)(b)(ii).  

3.  The police officer shall send the legally filed checklist and provide the grounds and documents 
that led to the arrest when referring/producing the accused before the Magistrate for further 
detention. 

4.  Before authorising the detention of the accused, the Magistrate shall read the report given by 
the Police officer in the conditions mentioned and only after recording its satisfaction would 
the Magistrate authorise detention. 

5.  Within  two  weeks  of  the  day  the  case  was  instituted,  the  decision  not  to  arrest  an  accused 
must be sent to the Magistrate with a copy to the Magistrate; this time frame may be extended 
by the District Superintendent of Police for reasons that must be stated in writing. 

6.  Within  two  weeks  after  the  day  the  case  was  instituted,  the  accused  must  receive  notice  of 
their  presence  under Section  41A of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code.  The  Superintendent  of 
Police for the District may grant an extension for a cause that must be stated in writing. 

7.  Failure  to  comply  with  the  aforementioned  directives  would  subject  the  Police  officers 
involved  to  departmental  action  as  well  as  punishment  for  contempt  of  court,  which  will  be 
brought before a High Court with territorial jurisdiction. 

8.  Authorising  detention  without  documenting  the  aforementioned  reasons  by  the  Judicial 

Magistrate concerned is subject to departmental action by the competent High Court. 

Constitutional validity of Section 498A IPC 

Section  498A  of  the  Indian  Constitution  protects  married  women  from  mistreatment  in  the 
marital household. The provision was included in the IPC to protect women from domestic abuse. Even 
though women are widely mistreated. This is the most hotly discussed portion of the IPC. The number 
of IPC offences against women has grown over time. The majority of instances have been recorded in 
Delhi,  India.  Every  year,  a  large  number  of  crimes  are  perpetrated  against  women.  Section  498A  is 
unquestionably necessary because, while there may be misuse, genuine cases cannot be avoided on this 
basis. Measures can be taken to close the loopholes.  

In  the  case  of Inder  Raj  Malik  and  others  vs.  Mrs  Sumita  Malik  (1986),  it  was  argued  that  this 
Section  violated Article  14 and Article  20  (2) of  the  Constitution.The  Dowry  Prohibition  Act  also 
addresses situations of this nature; hence, the combination of both legislation creates a situation known 
as ‘double jeopardy’. However, the Delhi High Court rejected this argument, ruling that this Section does 

Page 135 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

not create a scenario of double jeopardy. Section 498A differs from Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition 
Act in that the latter punishes just the demand for dowry and no element of cruelty is required, whereas 
Section 498A deals with the aggravated version of the offence. 

It  penalises  those  requests  for  significant  security  or  property  from  the  wife  or  her  family 
members that are accompanied by maltreatment against her. Therefore, a person may face charges for 
both  offences  covered  by  Section  4  of  the  Dowry  Prohibition  Act.  This  Section  also  grants  the  court 
broad authority in determining how to interpret the laws’ language and how to punish offenders. This 
Section is not unconstitutional. It does not give courts unbridled authority. 

In the well-known case of Wazir Chand vs. the State of Haryana (1988), the facts surrounding the 
burning death of a newlywed woman did not demonstrate either murder or suicide facilitated by a third 
party. As a result, the in-laws avoided the clutches of Sections 300 and 306 of IPC, but they were caught 
in the web of this recently enacted Section for the prevention of dowry harassment. Not to mention the 
items  they  continue  to  demand  from  the  girl’s  side,  the  fact  that  her  father  removed  a  significant 
amount  of  possessions  from  her  marital  home  after  she  passed  away  indicated  that  pressure  was 
applied  to  her  in-laws  and  that  it  persisted  up  until  her  death  to  obtain  additional  funds  and 
possessions.  

With the growth of modernization, education, financial stability, and newly found independence, 
the  radical  feminist  has  turned  498A  into  a  weapon.  Many  unlucky  spouses  and  in-laws  have  fallen 
victim to their spiteful daughters-in-law. 

Most cases in which Section 498A is used turn out to be  fake as consistently acknowledged by 
Indian  High  Courts  and  the  Supreme  Court  because  they  are  just  blackmail  tactics  by  the  wife  or  her 
close relatives when faced with a difficult marriage. In most situations, the 498A complaint is followed 
by a demand for a large sum of money or extortion to settle the issue outside of court. 

4.8 Defamation 
IPC Chapter XXI: Section 499 

Defamation  is  a  procedure  for  check  and  balance  on  the  Right  to  freedom  of  speech  and 
expression (Article 19). It is a procedure to ensure that nobody harms the reputation of any person or 
tend to create a wrong opinion of the person who is defamed, in the eyes of the public.  

To  make  you  understand  what  it  really  is,  suppose  there  are  two  party  members,  Meera  and 
Subodh standing for election. Subodh says, “Meera is a corrupt person, I have seen her taking bribes in 
the past, so do not give her vote”. This statement is untrue and harms the reputation of Meera, as no one 
in  the  public  will  give  the  vote  to  a  corrupt  person.  This  will  directly  hamper  Meera’s  winning  in  the 
election. 

To prevent this, provisions regarding Defamation are available in Section 499 to Section 502 of 

the Indian Penal Code. In this article, we will understand them in detail. 

Analysis of the offence of Defamation  
Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code talks about defamation. So, what is defamation? 

Any person who by spoken or written words, signs or visible gestures creates or publishes any 
imputation on any person with an intention to harm the reputation of that person. The person making 
such  imputation  should  have  the  knowledge  or  a  reason  to  believe  that  such  imputation  will  ruin  the 
reputation of the person.  

However,  there  are  many  exceptions  included  in  this  Section.  We  will  discuss  them  in  the 

approaching topic. 

Reputation  

To  sue  any  person  it  is  necessary  to  establish  that  real  damage  or  harm  has  occurred  to  the 
reputation of the person. Only speaking or writing the words, picturing or gesturing does not amount to 
defamation until the reputation of the person has been harmed. 

Harm to reputation is the only negative consequence that can arise from the act of defamation. 

Page 136 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

It  could  prove  harmful  to  your  professional  career as  well.  For  example,  if  someone  pointing  out  to  a 
shopkeeper says that you should not buy groceries from him as he sells low-grade things at a high rate. 
In  this  case,  if  the  statement  is  found  to  be  untrue  then  the  reputation  of  the  shopkeeper  is  being 
harmed as this will lead to the shortage of customers coming to his shop. 

Publication  

For a person to be sued for defamation, it is required that the publication of the words he spoke 

or wrote must have happened. What does it mean?  

It means that damage to the reputation of the person happens when the defamatory words have 
reached  to  any  third  person.  Publication  means  that  the  third  person  has  read,  heard  or  seen  the 
written, spoken, gestured or pictured defamatory words. If it has not happened then there is no ground 
to sue for defamation. 

The distinction between English Law and Indian Law  
An act of defamation can occur in two forms, libel and slander.  
Libel- it is a kind of defamation that is present in some permanent form such as in writing, printed or a 
picture. 
Slander- it is a kind of defamation that is present in an unwritten form such as spoken words, gestures 
or representation made with hands. 

In  English  law,  there  is  a  distinction  made  between  both  of  the  forms  under  the  categories  of 

criminal defamation and civil defamation. 

Under  criminal  law,  only  libel  is  an  offense  and  not  slander.  Whereas  in  civil  law,  libel  is  an 
offense  just  like  in  criminal  law  but  the  change  here  is  that  slander  is  also  an  offense  when  provided 
with proof. 

In  Indian  law,  both  slander  and  libel  are  recognized  as  criminal  offenses  under  Section  499  of 
IPC. Whereas, in the law of torts libel is actionable per se and slander is actionable. It means in the case 
of slander there has to be proof of the act of defamation. 

D.P. Choudhary v. Kumari Manjulata 

In  this case,  it  was  published  in  a  newspaper  that  Manjulata,  a  17-year-old  girl  belonging  to  a 
well-known family, eloped with a boy who lived closeby. After this, her reputation got tainted and she 
suffered a lot of disgrace, as this news was completely false and was published with irresponsibility. 
Later  on,  the  Court,  in  this  case,  ruled  out  the  Rs.  10000,  should  be  provided  to  the  defendant  as  it 
amounted to defamation. 

Forms of Publication 
There are various forms of publication in which the act of defamation can take place, let’s look at them.  
Direct communication to the Defamed  

If any defamation is made directly to the defamed and is not heard by anybody else, then it is not 
defamation.  It  is  necessary  that  any  third  party  hears  it  through  which  the  reputation  of  the  defamed 
goes down. 

Publication by Repetition  

There  is  a  limited  period  to  sue  for  defamation.  It  is  maintainable  till  one  year  since  the  act  of 
defamation took place. For a single publication, an action for libel can arise but for repetitive or multiple 
publications, the action can arise every time the libel is published. 

The Limitation Act, 1968 makes the limitation period of the libel on the internet to 1 year. After 

every publication on the internet, this period will get renewed. 

Page 137 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Khawar Butt vs Asif Nazir Mir 

This case was decided in the year 2013. The Delhi High Court, in this case, ruled out to set aside 

the multiple publication rule on the internet and to follow only the single publication rule. 
Printed  Matters:  Liability  of  editor  and  others  Section 501 of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  talks  about  the 
printing of defamatory things. It says that any person who prints or engraves such a matter which he 
knows or has reason to believe that such matter is of defamatory nature and hence, will lower down the 
reputation of the person and bring ridicule and disgrace to his/her character. 

This  Section  checks  for  the  printed  defamatory  matters  and  provides  the  provision  for  the 
punishment to the person who printed it. The punishment of a maximum of two years in jail or fine or 
both  is  provided  under  this  Section.  Now,  let’s  understand  what  is  the  provision  for  the  people  who 
further sells the defamatory printed content. 

Section 502 of the Indian Penal Code says that any person who sells or offers to sell any printed 

content that he knows or has reason to believe that it contains defamatory matter will be punished. 

The punishment will either be imprisonment which can be extended to a term of two years or 

could be fine. In some instances, both can be imposed. 

Therefore,  through  both  of  these  Sections,  the  printing  or  engraving,  selling  or  offering  to  sell, 

such a matter which contains some defamatory content, is a crime and is punishable. 

से संबंिधत आरोप) 
(cid:7408)कसी भी (cid:7390)ि(cid:7334)' से संबंिधत आरोप
Imputations concerning ‘Any Person’ ('(cid:7408)कसी भी (cid:7390)ि(cid:7334)
से संबंिधत आरोप
से संबंिधत आरोप
(cid:7408)कसी भी (cid:7390)ि(cid:7334)
(cid:7408)कसी भी (cid:7390)ि(cid:7334)
In  Section  499  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  the  ‘imputation  concerning  any  person’,  is  mentioned. 

Imputation in general terms means accusation or claim that someone has done something wrong. 
As  far  as  the  term  ‘concerning  any  person’  is  concerned,  this  means  that  defamation  should  be  clear 
enough to point out the person to whom the defamation is intended to be made and if it is published to 
others then the third person is also able to clearly understand who is defamed by the publication. 

Intention to Injure 

There has to be a knowledge or reason to believe that the act will certainly cause the defamation 
of the character of the person. It implies the mens rea of the person, that is the person should have the 
intention to harm the reputation of the other person. 
To win a defamation lawsuit, the defendant should prove that he had honest intentions and no malice, 
and it was just an honest mistake. 

Analysis of provisions of Sections 499 and 500, IPC  

The  provisions  regarding  defamation  are  provided 

to  502. Section 
501 and Section  502 has  already  been  explained  earlier  in  this  article.  Now,  let’s  understand  the 
provisions contained in Section 499 and Section 500. 

in  Section  499 

Section 499 provides the definition of defamation and all the cases and exceptions of the act of 

defamation. This is a lengthy Section with explanations and in total 10 exceptions included in it. 
Section 500 provides for punishment for the act of defamation. 

Explanation l: Defamation of the Dead  
In case, a person defames another person who has passed away or is already dead, by any means that is 
written, spoken, by gestures or pictures.then, it will be an act of defamation, this act would have harmed 
the reputation of the person if he would have been still alive, or in case it harms the reputation of the 
family or close relatives of the deceased. 

Explanation 2: Defamation of a Company or a Collection of Persons 

Page 138 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

If an act is intended to cause harm to a company or association or a group of people, then it will amount 
to  defamation.  This  means  under  it  companies  or  associations  can  slap  a  defamation  suit  against  an 
individual. 
Priya Parameshwaran Pillai v. Union of India and Ors. 
In  this case,  Priya,  a  Greenpeace  activist,  wrote  in  her  blog  that  the  environment  is  degraded  by  the 
power project which was set up by the Essar group. After which a suit of defamation was filed by the 
Essar group. Priya, in her argument, contended that the private companies should not be given the right 
to  file  a  defamation  suit  against  an  individual.  But  her  contention  was  set  aside  by  the  Court,  not 
allowing any more questions and contentions to be added further. This particular case has its roots in 
the previous Subramaniam Swamy v. Union of India case. Let us discuss that now. 

Subramaniam Swamy v. Union of India 
In the year 2014, Dr. Subramaniam Swamy alleged corruption charges on Ms. Jaylathitha. After which 
Ms.  Jaylathitha  framed  defamation  charges  on  Dr.  Subramaniam  Swamy.  He  in  return  challenged  the 
constitutional  validity  of  Section  499  and  Section  500  of  the  India  Penal  Code.  The  court,  in  this case, 
upheld the constitutional validity of the offense of criminal defamation. And ruled out that Section 499 
and  Section  500  of  the  India  Penal  Code,  impose  reasonable  restrictions  on  the  right  to  freedom  of 
speech and expression. 

Explanation 3: Defamation by Innuendo  

Well,  to  be  able  to  understand  it  we  must  first  understand  what  innuendo  in  general  terms 
means. Innuendo is a clever way to speak negative sentences in a very sarcastic way, which may appear 
to be positive at the surface of it. Under Section 499, defaming of any person by innuendo is a form of 
criminal defamation. 
Illustration 

• A says to B, pointing out to C, ‘C is a very even-handed person, I have not seen him making any 

discrimination against G. 

This  is  discrimination  as  A  intended  to  point  at  C  has  a  discriminatory  person  and  that  he  has 
discriminated in the case of G. 

• B asks A,’ do you think someone discriminated? 

A in return pointed at C and said, ‘well you know, who can’. This is discrimination has it was said in a 
sarcastic way while pointing at C. 

Explanation 4: What is Harming Reputation?  
Defamation is an act by which a person’s reputation is harmed, but what is harming reputation? 

According to explanation 4 given in Section 499, the reputation of a person is harmed when the 
act  injures  the  moral  or  intellectual  character  of  the  person  or  lowers  his  credit.  It  also  hampers  the 
reputation if the act lowers down the person’s character in the respect of his cast or his calling.  

The act of defamation which let the others believe that the body of any particular person is in a 

detestable condition. 

All  of  these  acts  are  considered  to  harm  the  reputation  of  the  person  and  comes  under  the 

offense of criminal defamation. 

Exceptions provided in Section 499  
As mentioned earlier, there are ten exceptions in this Section. We will now have a look at them one by 
one.  
First Exception: Truth for Public Good  

This  exception  provides  that  if  any  information  which  is  true  and  for  the  good  of  the  public  at 

large, then that is not covered under the act of defamation. 
Things to be noted here is, first, the information should compulsorily be true. Second, the information 
should be of a kind that it benefits the public. Also, it is compulsory to publish that information. 

Page 139 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Second Exception: Fair Criticism of Public Servants  

This exception provides that if an act in which the public servant is criticized for discharging any 
of  his  public  functions  or  and  the  act  of  criticizing  his  conduct  and  character  when  it  appears  to  be 
wrong and not otherwise. Then, such an act will not amount to defamation. 
Illustration  
If Ramesh mentions that the particular officer Z is very bad at his job, then this is not defamation under 
the following exception. 

The element of Good Faith-Importance  

It is to be noted that any such comment made or views expressed must be made in good faith. 

That is, if it is made out of malice or in bad faith, it will be considered as an act of defamation. 

The Opinion must be Fair and Honest  

Any  opinion  made  criticizing  the  conduct,  character  or  discharge  of  any  functions  of  a  public 

servant must be fair and honest. Otherwise, it will be considered as an offense of defamation. 
Third Exception: Fair comment on public conduct of public men other than public servants  

If  any  person  expresses  his/her  views  and  opinion  on  the  conduct  of  any  other  person  who 

discharges any kind of public functions, he will not be liable for the act of defamation.  
The condition in regards to this is that such views and opinions should be made in good faith and with 
honesty. If it is made otherwise then the act will fall under the offense of defamation. 
Illustration 
If there is a meeting taking place which requires the support of the public or if Z applies for a petition 
against some action or doing of the government. 

Rights of the Press: Summary of principles governing Rights of Press and Media  

No direct freedom is given corning the media law, but Article 19 which gives the right to freedom 
of speech and expression per se provides this freedom to the media. The press is the watchdog of the 
public, that is why it is necessary to make certain that a positive impact is formed by the public after 
receiving any news and no negative opinion arises.  

The  owner,  editor,  and  publisher,  all  of  them  in  the  line,  are  responsible  if  any  news  which 

defames anyone is published to any third person. 

Defaming again here means the news which lowers someone’s reputation or character. 
Google India Pvt Ltd. v. Visakha Industries 
In  this case,  an  article  was  published  with  a  caption  ‘Poisoning  the  system:  Hindustan  Times’.  In  this 
article,  the  names  of  many  famous  politicians  were  mentioned  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  the 
Visakha Industries. 

The case ruled out that all of it does not amount to defamation. It should be noted that there is a 

difference of publication on the internet and publications in print media. 

Fourth Exception: Report of proceedings of Courts of justice 

If  any  proceedings  of  the  court  or  the  result  of  any  case  given  by  the  court  are  published  then 
that will not amount to defamation. The conditions pertaining to this are such that publication should 
be true and apt. 

Fifth Exception: Comment on Cases  

If  any  person  publishes  any  information  regarding  the  merits  of  the  case  or  in  regard  to  the 

conduct of any person who was a witness, in that case, it will not be defamation. 
It is important to note, the element of good faith is requisite here. 
Illustration 

Page 140 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

If A says that B seemed to lie on the witness stand. Here, this condition will fall under the ambit of this 
exception. But if A says that B was lying on the stand, as I know him as a man who can lie. 
Here, this will fall out of the exception and will amount to defamation. Why? Because he is applying his 
knowledge which is not included in the court proceedings. 

Sixth Exception: Literary criticism  

If any person in good faith expresses his opinion in regards to the performance or character of 
the author, which the author has submitted to the judgment of the public or viewers, then it does not 
amount to defamation. 

To explain this, the author must have by acts or expressly submitted her/his performance to the 

judgment of the public. If that is not the case, the act will amount to defamation. 
Some examples: 

1.  An author of a book who publishes it submits it to the judgment of the public. 
2.  An actor who does a film submits it to the public to give its judgments. 
3.  A performer, who performs on the stage in front of the viewers submits it to the judgment of 

the public. 

The thing to be noted is that any opinion which is made should be in consideration of the performance. 
Illustration 

X says ‘Y must be a man with the wrong mindset’. This will fall under the exception. 

But if X says, ‘no wonder his book is indecent, for I know him as a man who is indecent himself’. This 
will not fall under this exception and amount to defamation. 

Seventh Exception: Censure by One in Authority  

If  any  person  passes  censure  on  the  conduct  of  any  other  person,  then  it  will  not  amount  to 
defamation,  provided  that  the  person  applying  censure  should  have  the  lawful  authority  or  any 
authority arising out of a valid contract, over the person on whose matters the censure is applied. 
Illustration 

• Any employee being censored by the employer in good faith. 
• In good faith, any teacher censures the conduct of a student in front of any other student. 

Eighth Exception: Complaint to Authority  
If any person who has  lawful authority over the other person, accuses him then it  will not  amount to 
defamation. 
Illustration  
If A in good faith prefers any accusation regarding X to a judge. 
If a warden in good faith accuses a hosteller C to the dean of the college. 
Kanwal Lal v. the State of Punjab 
In this case, it was noted that the defense to fall under exception 8, the publication must be made before 
the  authority  of  law.  The  District  Panchayat  Officer  or  the  Panchayat  had  no  such  lawful  authority  in 
regards to the provisions of the Punjab Gram Panchayat Act, 1952, in which the Panchayats only had the 
jurisdiction. 

Ninth Exception: Imputation for Protection of Interests  
If  any  accusations  or  imputations  are  made  on  another  person  in  order  to  protect  the  interests  of 
oneself, then it is not defamation. 
Illustration 
An  employee  D,  who  has  been  told  to  make  a  monthly  report  on  the  conduct  of  the  employee  of  that 
sector, writes about the bad conduct of one employee Z then, he will fall under this exception. 
Tenth Exception: Caution in Good Faith  

If any caution is made for the good of that person or for the good of the public then it will not 

amount to defamation. 

Page 141 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

On the Scope of Sections 499 and 500, IPC 
Distinction between Libel of Court and Contempt of Court  

This refers to the defamation of the Judge personally and the Contempt of Court. When the judge 
is personally defamed by any person then he can sue the person on his own personal capacity and not 
as a judge of the court. 

On the other hand, Contempt of Court is the act that hampers the administration of justice and 
causes  disrespect  of  the  court.  The  Supreme  Court  and  the  High  Court  have  the  power  to  punish  for 
contempt of itself under Article 129 and Article 215 of the Constitution, respectively.  

In Perspective  Publications  v.  the  State  of  Maharashtra,  it  was  noted  that  there  has  to  be  a 
distinction made between the libel and Contempt of Court. A test has to be taken to determine what the 
act constitutes, a disrespect of the judge or the hampering of the due process of the administration of 
law. 

Whether  accurate  and  true  report  of  Assembly  Proceedings  published  in  newspapers  would 

amount to Defamation  

In Exception 4, it has been mentioned that true and accurate proceedings of the court will not fall 

under the ambit of defamation in reference to that, let’s look at a case. 

In Dr.  Suresh  Chandra  Banerjee  v.  Punit  Goala,  it  was  ruled  out  that,  the  reports  of  the 

proceedings of the Parliament do not fall under the exception 4. 
It was discriminatory on the part of the law. Later on, it was changed when Article 361A was introduced 
by the 44th Amendment Act, in the year 1978. 

Under  the  Parliamentary  Proceedings  Act  which  came  in  the  year  1977,  protection  by  law  has 
been given to the publication in newspapers or broadcasts by wireless telegraphy of substantially true 
reports of any proceedings of either House of Parliament. Further, it is provided that it should be made 
in good faith. 

The  publication  can  take  place  with  the  authority  given  by  both  Houses  of  the  Parliament 

under Article 105(2) and by the State Legislature under Article 194(2). 

Who should in a newspaper be prosecuted for making Defamatory Imputations? 

In  the  case  of  the  newspaper,  generally,  people  will  think  that  only  the  editor  will  be  held 
responsible  for  publishing  defamatory  matter  but  the  fact  is  that  the  owner,  author,  editor,  or 
distributor, all can be held liable for the act of defamation. It should be noted that vicarious liability will 
arise which will make the proprietor of the newspaper liable to pay damages arising out of it. 

In  the  case  of Narayan  Singh  v.  Rajmal,  the  editor  of  the  newspaper  was  absent  and  the 
defamatory  matter  was  published  by  the  sub-editor.  The  court  ruled  out  that  the  editor  was  not 
responsible as he was absent with no bad intentions. 

In the case, Mohammed Koya v. Muthukoya, it was ruled  out that the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867, only recognizes the editor as the legal entity and no one else, in the matter concerning 
the publishing of matter in a newspaper. 

It was further clarified in another case of K.M. Mathew v. K.A. Abraham & Ors, the publisher of a 
book  was  charged  with  the  offense  of  defamation.  He  moved  to  the  High  Court  contending  that 
under Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, only the editor can be held liable and 
not the chief editor of the newspaper. The High Court rejected his plea, then he further, sought plea to 
the Supreme Court that also rejected it. 

The  rationale  of  the  court  was  that  there  can  arise  a  presumption  against  the  editor  that  he  is 
responsible  because  he  checks  and  selects  the  material  which  is  to  be  published.  But  this  is  a  matter 
which  can  be  rebutted  and  under  Section  7  of  the  Press  and  Registration  of  Books  Act,  the  same 
presumption can also arise for someone else which has to be proved. 
Defamation of Wife by Husband 

Law  considers  husband  and  wife  as  one  and  the  private  communication  between  them  is 

privileged, according to Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 

Page 142 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

In the case of T.J. Ponnen v. M.C Verghese, the husband wrote a letter to his wife containing defamatory 
matter. The court held that this was under Section 122 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872. 

4.9 Criminal Intimidation, Insult and Annoyance 
IPC Chapter XXII: Sections 503 – 505 

The Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 is  the  substantive  law  governing  the  criminal  activities  in 
India. Chapter XXII of the Code, consisting of Section 503-Section 510 provides for offences which fall in 
the nature of criminal intimidation, intentional insult and annoyance.  

The  law  has  an  objective  of  punishing  offenders  for  all  kinds  of  criminal  offences  but  in 
contemporary  times,  the  law  does  not  entirely  mirror  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  society. 
Although  the  provisions  are  relevant  and  binding,  they  fail  to  address  the  technological  advances  in 
today’s world. The law is archaic but provides a base for new developments.  

Criminal Intimidation 

The  offence  of  criminal  intimidation  is  defined  under Section  503  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code, 
1860. The  provision  states  that  anyone  who  threatens  any  other  person  on  the  following  grounds  is 
liable for criminal intimidation. 

1.  Threatens injury to his person; 
2.  Threatens injury to his reputation; 
3.  Threatens injury to his property; 
4.  Threatens injury to the person or reputation of anyone in whom the person is interested. 
Further, the intention should be to cause alarm to that person; or to make them perform any act which 
they are not legally bound to do; or to omit any act which they are legally entitled to perform. If they are 
forced  to  do  all  of  these  acts  as  a  means  to  avoid  execution  of  such  threat,  this  amounts  to  criminal 
intimidation. 

The explanation of this section states that a threat to injure the reputation of a deceased person 

in whom the person threatened is interested is also covered under this section. 
Example: ‘A’ for the purpose of inducing B to refrain from filing a complaint against him, threatens to 
kill B’s wife. A is liable to be punished for the offence of criminal intimidation. 

The  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of Vikram Johar vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (2019) has  observed 
that the mere act of abusing a person in a filthy language does not satisfy the essential ingredients of the 
offence  of  criminal  intimidation.  The  complaint  was  that  the  accused  came  with  a  revolver  to  the 
complainant’s house and abused him in a filthy language. They also attempted to assault him but when 
the  neighbours  arrived,  they  fled  from  the  spot.  The  Bench  held  that  the  above  allegations prima 
facie do not constitute the offence of criminal intimidation. 

The Tripura High  Court in its recent judgment of Shri Padma Mohan Jamatia vs. Smt. Jharna Das 
Baidya  (2019) has  observed  that  the  mere  use  of  abusive  words/  filthy  language  and  body  posture 
during  the  speech  of  a  political  leader  is  not  included  within  the  ambit  of  the  provisions  of  criminal 
intimidation under the IPC. 

In  the  case  of Manik  Taneja  vs.  State  of  Karnataka  (2015), the  Apex  Court  held  that  posting 
comments  about  ill-treatment  by  the  police personnel  on  Facebook Page  may  not  amount  to  criminal 
intimidation.  In  this  case,  the  appellant  was  involved  in  a  road  accident,  wherein  she  clashed  with  an 
auto-rickshaw.  The  passenger  of  the  auto  sustained  injuries  and  was  subsequently  admitted  in  a 
hospital. The appellant duly paid all the expenses of the injured and no FIR was lodged.  

However, she was called to the police station and was allegedly threatened by the police officers. 
Aggrieved with the way that she was treated, she posted comments on the Facebook page of Bangalore 
Traffic Police, accusing the police officer of harsh behaviour and the harassment meted out to her. The 
Police Inspector filed a case against the appellants for this act and an FIR was registered under Sections 
353 and 506  of  the  IPC.  The  Bench  held  that  there  was  no  intention  on  the  appellant’s  part  to  cause 
alarm under Section 503 of the IPC. 

Page 143 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

In Amitabh  Adhar  vs.  NCT  of  Delhi  (2000),  it  was  held  that  a  mere  threat  does  not  amount  to 

criminal intimidation. There must be an intention to cause alarm to the person threatened.  

In Shri Vasant Waman Pradhan vs. Dattatraya Vithal Salvi (2004), it was held that intention is the 

soul of criminal intimidation. It needs to be gathered by the surrounding circumstances. 

The  Orissa  High  Court, 

in Amulya  Kumar  Behera  vs.  Nabhagana  Behera  Alias  Nabina 
(1995) examined the meaning of the term ‘alarm.’ The Court held that the mere expression of any word 
without any intention to cause alarm was not sufficient to be brought under the ambit of Section 506. 
The  Court  also  observed  that  this  provision  is  relatively  new,  and  originally  terms  like  ‘terror’  or 
‘distress’ had been proposed instead of ‘alarm.’ 

The complainant, in this case, argued that he was abused in a filthy language by the accused and 
if the witnesses had not intervened, he would have suffered more injuries apart from a fist blow from 
the  accused.  The  complainant  admitted  that  he  was  not  alarmed  by  the  threat  given  by  the  accused. 
Hence,  the  Court  held  that  since  an  essential  ingredient  of  the  offence  was  missing,  no  case  could  be 
established. 

The  Supreme  Court  elaborated  the  scope  of  Section  503,  IPC  in Romesh Chandra Arora vs. State 
(1960).  In  this  case,  the  accused-appellant  was  charged  with  criminal  intimidation.  The  accused 
threatened a person X and his daughter, of injury to reputation by releasing a nude picture of the girl 
unless money was paid to him. The intent was to cause alarm to them. The Court stated that the aim of 
the accused was to cause alarm to get the money and to ensure that he did not go ahead with the threat 
of releasing the damaging photographs on a public platform. 

The extent of nature of the threat 

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  threat  is  direct  in  nature.  In Re A.K. Gopalan vs. The State of Madras, 
Union of India: Intervener (1950), the Court held that if a speaker at a public meeting threatened police 
officers stationed at Malabar, with injury to their person, property or reputation – then he was liable for 
committing the offence of criminal intimidation.  

In  the  case  of Anuradha  Kshirsagar  vs.  State  of  Maharashtra  (1989), the  accused  allegedly 
threatened the female teachers by shouting that the teachers should be caught by their hair, kicked on 
their waist and pulled out of the hall. The Bombay High Court ruled that these remarks constituted the 
offence of criminal intimidation. 

The nature of the injury threatened 

In the case of Nand Kishore vs. Emperor (1927), a butcher who sold beef was threatened that if he 
indulged  in  the  acts  of  buying  or  selling  beef,  then  he  would  be  sent  to  jail.  Further,  his  living  in  the 
municipality was also threatened. The Court held that this amounted to criminal intimidation. 

In Doraswamy Ayyar vs. King-Emperor (1924), it  was  held  that  the  threat  of  punishment  by  God 
could not be included in the ambit of criminal intimidation. If the person who threatens is incapable of 
putting the threat to execution, then he cannot be held liable for the offence of criminal intimidation. 

Punishment for criminal intimidation 

The  punishment  for  the  offence  of  criminal  intimidation  is  laid  down  under Section  506  of  the 

Indian Penal Code, 1860.  
The provision is divided into two parts: 

1.  In simple cases of criminal intimidation, whoever commits criminal intimidation is liable to be 
punished with imprisonment for a period which may extend to two years, or a fine, or both.  

Classification of the offence: This part is a non-cognizable, bailable and compoundable offence.  
Triable by: Any Magistrate 
2. If the threat is to cause: 

• Death or grievous hurt;  
• Destruction of any property by fire;  

Page 144 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

• To  cause  an  offence  to  be  committed  which  is  punishable  with  imprisonment  up  to  a  term  of 

seven years, life imprisonment or death; 

• To attribute unchastity to a woman. 

Then in the above-mentioned cases, the prescribed punishment is simple or rigorous imprisonment for 
a term extending to seven years; or a fine; or both. 
The second part of the provision, as compared to the first part, deals with prescribing punishment for 
graver forms of criminal intimidation.  

Classification of the offence: This part is a non-cognizable, bailable and non-compoundable offence.  
Triable by: Magistrate of the First Class 

It is important to note that, to attract the second part of this section it is essential that there is a 

threat of either causing death or grievous hurt.  

In Keshav Baliram Naik vs. State of Maharashtra (1995), it  was  alleged  that  the  accused  touched 
the hand of the prosecutrix, a blind girl, when she was asleep and further proceeded to remove her quilt 
and  insert  his  hand  inside  her  dress.  He  threatened  to  kill  her  if  she  disclosed  his  identity.  The  Court 
held this to be a case of criminal intimidation under Part II of the Section, apart from other offences. 

In Ghanshyam vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (1989), the accused entered the house at night, armed 
with a knife. He threatened to kill the residents. This was held to be criminal intimidation under Part II 
of the provision. 

A  proposal  for  reform  in  criminal  law  is,  to  include  the  threat  of  suicide  with  the  intention  of 

coercing a public servant to perform an act or omit an act, as a type of criminal intimidation. 

गुमनाम संचार (cid:7367)ारा आपरािधक धमक(cid:7409)) 
Criminal intimidation by anonymous communication(गुमनाम संचार (cid:7367)ारा आपरािधक धमक(cid:7409)
गुमनाम संचार (cid:7367)ारा आपरािधक धमक(cid:7409)
गुमनाम संचार (cid:7367)ारा आपरािधक धमक(cid:7409))

Section  507  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 is  an  aggravated  form  of  intimidation.  This  section 
covers instances wherein the intimidator commits the offence anonymously. It has been stated in this 
section  that  whoever  indulges  into  the  act  of  criminal  intimidation  by  anonymous  communication  or 
takes  precautions  to  conceal  his  identity  or  abode,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  which  may 
extend  up  to  two  years.  This  punishment  is  in  addition  to  the  punishment  provided  for  the  offence 
under Section 506 of the IPC, 1860. 
Example: If a person anonymously writes a letter to a person X, in which he threatens that he will burn 
X’s house, then this is an offence under this Section. 

Classification of the offence: Bailable, non-cognizable and non-compoundable. 
Triable by: Magistrate of the First Class 
The  act  caused  by  inducing  a  person  to  believe  that  he  will  be  rendered  an  object  of  the  Divine 
displeasure 
Section  508  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 covers  this  offence.  The  essential  ingredients  of  the 
provision are stated below:  

1.  Any  person  who  voluntarily  either  causes  or  attempts  to  cause  any  person  to  perform  acts 
which the person is not legally bound to do or to omit to do any act which he is legally entitled 
to do. 

2.  By the way of inducing or attempting to induce the person.  
3.  To believe that if he does not perform the acts asked by the offender, then either the person or 
someone else in whom he has an interest, will become or will be rendered by some act of the 
offender an object of Divine displeasure. 

The punishment is imprisonment for a duration which may extend to one year; or fine; or both.  
Classification of the offence: Non-cognizable, bailable and compoundable by the person against whom 
the offence was committed. 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

Page 145 of 149 

 
 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

Example 1: The  messages  that  are  forwarded  on  various  social media  platforms  to  share a particular 
text to twenty other people or abstain from something, otherwise a Divine entity would inflict pain or 
any other method of divine displeasure, fall into the category of this offence. 
Example 2: If a person ‘A’ threatens ‘B’ that if ‘B’ does not perform a particular act, then A will kill one 
of his own children, under such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render B an object 
of Divine displeasure. In such a case, an offence has been committed by A under this section. 
Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace 
Section 504 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 deals with intentional insult. The provision states that any 
person who intentionally insults and as a consequence provokes any person, intending or knowing, that 
it  is  likely  that  such  provocation  will  induce  the  person  to  break  the  public  peace  or  indulge  into  the 
commission of some other offence, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment which may 
extend up to two years; or with fine; or both. 

Classification of the offence: Non-cognizable, bailable and compoundable by the person insulted 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

In  the  case  of Fiona Shrikhande vs. State of Maharashtra (2013), it  was  held  that  the  intentional 
insult  must  be  of  such  a  degree  that  it  should  provoke  a  person  to  either  break  the  public  peace  or 
indulge into the commission of any other offence. Merely abusing does not satisfy the ingredients of the 
offence. 

In Ramesh  Kumar  vs.  Smt.  Sushila  Srivastava  (1996), the  Rajasthan  High  Court  held  that  the 
manner  in  which  the  accused  addressed  the  complainant  was prima facie such  that  it  depicts  that  the 
person was insulted and provoked. The term ‘insult’ means to either treat with offensive disrespect or 
to offer an indignity to the person. The inference has to be drawn not solely from words but also from 
the tone and the manner in which they were spoken. 

In  the  case  of Abraham vs. State of Kerala (1960), it  was  clarified  by  the  Kerala  High  Court  that 
merely breaching good manners does not fall into the ambit of the section. The essential component of 
the offence is to figure out the intention of the offender. 

In Philip  Rangel  vs.  Emperor  (1931), the  accused  was  a  shareholder  in  a  bank  and  had 
requisitioned  a  meeting  for  the  shareholders.  In  the  meeting,  it  was  proposed  that  he  should  be 
expelled. The accused reacted to this by uttering abusive words. The Bombay High Court clarified that 
the words should amount to something more than ‘mere verbal abuse.’ The language cannot be held to 
amount  to  intentional  insult  if  the  Court  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  there  was  no  intention  of  the 
accused that the words should be ‘taken literally’ by those to whom it was addressed. 

The  Orissa  High  Court  in  the  case  of Ram  Chandra  Singh  vs.  Nabrang  Rai  Barma  (1998), the 
complainant  stated  that  the  accused  had  built  a  boundary  wall  over  his  roof.  When  the  complainant 
protested, he was abused with filthy language. The Court held that whether mere abuse would amount 
to  an  offence  under  this  section  is  dependent  on  various  factors  such  as  the  status  of  the  parties,  the 
nature  of  abuse  and  several  other  factors.  The  Court  held  that  such  words  are  normally  used  by  the 
parties in petty quarrels and hence did not amount to an offence under this provision. 

It is not essential that there must be an actual breach of peace for the application of this section. 
The essential element is the intention of the offender to provoke the breach of the peace or he should 
have knowledge that his provocation is likely to cause the commission of an offence. This principle was 
observed in the case of Devi Ram vs. Mulakh Raj (1962). 

In Mohammed  Ibrahim  Maracayar  vs.  Ismail  Maracayar  (1949), a  father  who  lived  in  Vellore 
wrote  an  insulting  letter  to  his  daughter  and  her  husband.  The  Court  held  that  the  reaction  of  the 
person insulted does not have to be considered. An intentional insult which would lead to provocation 
and subsequent breach of the peace would render the offender liable under this section. 

Statements conducing to public mischief 
Section  505  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 lays  down  the  provision  with  respect  to  statements 
conducive of public mischief. 

Page 146 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The provision in its first clause states that any person who makes, publishes or circulates any statement 
or rumour or report with the intention: 

1.  To cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the Army, Navy or 

the Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty;  

2.  To cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the general public, or to any particular 
section of the public whereby any person may be convinced to commit an offence against the 
State or against public tranquillity; 

3.  To incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit any kind of 

offence against any other class or a community. 

The perpetrator in all these aforementioned situations will be liable to be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend up to the duration of three years; or with fine; or both. 

Classification of the offence: Non-cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

In Kalicharan Mohapatra vs. Srinivasa Sahu (1959) the Orissa High Court observed that although 
the provision is a definite restriction on the freedom of speech and expression, the offence committed 
should be construed in the favour of the defence. The Court held that legitimate display of grievances by 
means of publication of pamphlets, which some sections of the public may have against the authorities, 
cannot be brought under the ambit of this provision. It was held that such an act does not constitute an 
offence under this Section. 

In  the  case  of Kedar  Nath  vs.  State  of  Bihar  (1962), the  constitutional  validity  of  Section  505 
and Section  124A  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 was  called  into  question.  The  Apex  Court  in  its 
judgment said that each constituent element of Section 505 of IPC,1860 has a reference to and a direct 
effect on the security of the State and the public order. It declared that Section 505 of IPC, 1860 did not 
exceed the boundaries of reasonable restriction for the purposes of the right of freedom of speech and 
expression. 

Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes 

The  second  clause  of Section  505  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 states  that  any  person  who 
makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report which contains a rumour or alarming news on 
the following grounds: 
1.  Religion 
2.  Race 
3.  Place of birth 
4.  Residence 
5.  Language 
6.  Caste  
7.  Community 

Such person shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend up to a duration of three years; or 
is liable to be fined; or both, for creating or promoting, or which is likely to create and promote, feelings 
of  enmity,  hatred  or  ill-will  among  various  religious,  racial,  linguistic  or  regional  groups  or  castes  or 
communities. 
Classification of the offence: Cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 
If the aforementioned offence is committed by any person in a place of worship or in any assembly that 
is engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, then such a person is liable 
to be punished with imprisonment which may extend to a duration of five years and shall also be liable 
for paying a fine. 
Classification of the offence: Cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

Page 147 of 149 

 
 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

The  exception  to Section  505  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 states  that  if  a  person  who 
publishes  or  circulates  any  statement,  rumour  or  report,  has  some  reasonable  grounds  for  believing 
that such statement, rumour or report is true and he published or circulated it in good faith and without 
any  malice  or  intention,  then  it  is  not  an  offence  under  this  section.  The  term  good  faith  has  been 
defined under Section 52 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Under this provision, due care and attention 
are required to constitute good faith. 

In Bilal Ahmed Kaloo vs. State of Andhra Pradesh (1997), it was held that publication of the words 
or  expression  is  a sine qua non for  establishing  an  offence  under  Section  505(2)  of  the  Indian  Penal 
Code, 1860. The Court further stated that the words ‘ whoever makes, publishes or circulates’ cannot be 
interpreted disjunctively. They are supplementary to each other. 

In the case of Manzar Sayeed Khan vs. State of Maharashtra (2007), the Apex Court observed that 
merely inciting the feelings of one group or community without any reference to some other group or 
community, cannot be brought under the ambit of Section 505(2). It further emphasized that the effect 
of words should be judged from the standards of reasonable, strong-minded and courageous men. The 
perspective of weak and vacillating minds cannot be considered. 

Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman 
Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 lays down the offence of insulting the modesty of a woman 
through word, gestures or acts. 

The provision states that any person who has the intention to insult the modesty of any woman 
and  pursuantly  utters  any  word;  or  makes  any  sound  or  gesture;  or  exhibits  any  object,  with  the 
intention that such sound or word shall be heard; or such object or gesture is seen by such woman, or if 
the offender intrudes the privacy of such woman – then such person is liable to be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to the duration of one year or is liable to be fined; or both. 
The intention of the offender should be considered. Even if it is not possible to place the exact words on 
record,  if  the  Court  arrives  at  a  finding  that  the accused  had  the  requisite  intention  then  the  offender 
can be punished for the same. 
Classification of the offence: Bailable, cognizable and compoundable by the woman who was insulted 
or whose privacy was intruded, with the permission of the Court. 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

Article  51(A)(e)  of  the  Constitution  of  India,  1950 states  that  all  the  citizens  of  the  country 

should strive to renounce practices which are derogatory to the women in India. 

In  the  case  of Emperor  vs.  Tarak  Das  Gupta  (1925), the  accused  sent  a  letter  to  an  unmarried 
nurse,  with  whom  he  had  no  previous  acquaintance.  The  letter  contained  indecent  overtures.  The 
accused was held liable for outraging the modesty of a woman by exhibiting the object. The Court held 
that it was not necessary that the offender themselves should exhibit the object. An agent, such as the 
post office, can also be employed for fulfilling this purpose. 

In  the  case  of State  of  Punjab  vs.  Major  Singh  (1966), the  offender  indulged  into  an  act  of 
unnatural  lust.  He  ruptured  the  hymen  and  caused  a  ¾”  tear  inside  the  vagina  of  a  seven  and  a  half 
months old female child. The Supreme Court, in this case, held that the act of outraging the modesty of a 
woman was not restricted by the age of the victim. It was also not dependent on the fact that whether 
the  victim  knew  or  was  conscious  about  the  acts  being performed  on  her.  They  held  that  the  accused 
had committed the offence of outraging the modesty of a woman. Justice Bachawat held that the essence 
of a woman’s modesty is her sex, which a female of tender age also possesses. The crux of the issue is 
the culpable intention of the offender. 

Justice Mudholkar stated that the reaction of the woman is not the sole criteria to see whether an 

act amounts to outraging the modesty of a woman. 

These  aforementioned  views  were  reiterated  in  the  case  of Mrs  Rupan  Deol  Bajaj  &  Anr.  vs. 
Kanwar Pal Singh Gill & Anr. (1995). In this case, the complainant held the position of a senior IAS officer 
of  the  Punjab  Government.  It  was  alleged  that,  in  a  party  hosted  at  a  colleague’s  house,  the  accused 
herein, who held the post of the Director-General of Police, Punjab slapped her posterior and behaved 

Page 148 of 149 

 
 
 
Sub- LAW OF CRIMES, SEM -2, Mumbai University New Syllabus – 2022-2023 

indecently with her in front of the gathering. The Apex Court held that the ultimate test for ascertaining 
if  the  modesty  has  been  outraged  is  that  –  if  the  actions  of  the  offender  could  be  perceived  as  such 
which are capable of shocking the sense of decency of a woman. The Court held the accused guilty of the 
offence. 

In the case of J.Jaishankar vs. Government of India & Anr. (1996), the Apex Court observed that the 

conviction of the offender under Section 509 of IPC, 1860 involved moral turpitude. 

Misconduct in public by a drunken person 

Section  510  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code,  1860 deals  with  the  offence  of misconduct  by  a  drunken 

person in public. 

The provision states that any person who is in a state of intoxication appears in a public place, or 
in  any  place  which  constitutes  trespass  if  he  enters  it  and  there  if  he  conducts  himself  in  a  manner 
which  may  cause  annoyance  to  any  person,  then  such  a  person  is  liable  to  punished  with  simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to a period of twenty-four hours or is liable to be fined for a 
sum which may extend to ten rupees; or both. 
Classification of the offence: Non-cognizable, bailable and non-compoundable 
Triable by: Any Magistrate 

This provision covers the acts of an intoxicated person who causes annoyance to other people. It 
is  essential  to  note  that  the  provision  governs  an  intoxicated  person  who  causes  annoyance.  Mere 
intoxication  is  not  covered  by  this  provision.  The  nature  of  this  offence  could  be  that  the  offender  is 
causing  annoyance  in public  or  they  refuse  to  leave  a  certain place  where  they  do  not  have  a  right  to 
enter without the permission of the owner. It is also crucial to note that no mens rea is required for this 
offence. 

Further,  to  analyse  this  section  from  a  contemporary  perspective,  it  can  be  observed  that  the 
punishment  holds  no  value.  Imprisonment  for  24  hours  is  not  sufficient.  Even  the  amount  of  fine 
imposed on the offenders holds negligible value. It is necessary to revamp the status quo by introducing 
reforms in criminal law, which address these issues. 

